II.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.     Merrill Lynch and Mercury achieve a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of
       ECU 5,000 million (Merrill Lynch, ECU 16,776.2 million; and Mercury, ECU 513.2
       million). Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of ECU 250 million
       (Merrill Lynch, ECU 3,287.9 million; and Mercury, ECU 377.18 million). As regards
       Mercury, which is active in the fund management business, the parties have provided a
       calculation based on banking income, in line with point 58 of the Commission Notice on
       Calculation of Turnover. Only Mercury achieves two-thirds of its Community turnover in
       the UK. The notified operation has therefore a Community dimension.
III.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
7.     The only overlap between Merrill Lynch and Mercury is in respect of assets management
       or investment management services. Their activities in this sector appear to be largely
       complementary. Asset management services include the creation, establishment and
       marketing of retail pooled funds (mutual funds, unit trusts, investment trusts and open
       ended investment companies), and the provision of portfolio management services to
       pension funds, institutions, international organisations and private investors.
8.     For the purpose of the present case it is not necessary to decide, whether these segments
       amount to relevant product markets, neither is it necessary to decide upon the geographic
       dimension of these markets. On the basis of the assessment set out below, a dominant
       position would not be created or reinforced even on the narrowest market definition.
9.     Market shares for these activities are difficult to assess. Participants in the investment
       banking and other financial services business tend for some areas to rely on “league
       tables”. These are designed to give an indication of the relative market position and
       performance in what is a fragmented business sector. The Commission considered also in
       previous cases that league tables adequately reflect the market position of companies
       involved in this business.1
10.    According to the information contained in the league tables, there are no markets, however
       they are defined in terms of product and geographic dimension, where the parties’
       combined share would exceed 15%. The only segment where the parties’ activities overlap is
       that of mutual funds in Luxembourg, where the parties combined share would be less than 2%.
11.    Asset management services is a fragmented sector, where a number of important groups
       like AXA, Barclays, UBS, Schroeder, Morgan Grenfell and many others ensure a high
       degree of competition. Thus, the present merger does not appear to raise any concern.
12.    In view of the position of the parties to the concentration in the affected area, it appears
       that the notified operation will not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of
       which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial
       part of that area.
1 Case IV/M. 642, Chase Manhattan / Chemical Banking, para. 13.
                                                         2

IV. CONCLUSION
13. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
    decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No
    4064/89.
                                                   For the Commission,
                                               3
