      shares in ZFS through Zürich Allied AG (ZA). B.A.T. will separate its financial
      services business (BAFS) from its tobacco activities through a court scheme of
      reorganisation. Current shareholdings in BAT will be replaced by shareholdings in
      two new companies, British American Tobacco plc which will assume B.A.T.’s
      tobacco activities and Allied Zürich plc (AZ), which will own the shareholding in
      ZFS group. ZA will own 57 % of ZFS and AZ will own 43 % of ZFS. The relation
      between ZA and AZ will be regulated through a Governing Agreement.
III. The concentration
6.    The operation is a merger in the meaning of Article 3 (1) (a) of Council Regulation
      No. 4064/89. Zürich and B.A.T., two previously independent companies, merge
      their businesses into a new company created for this purpose. and cease to be active
      in the relevant markets. All remaining rights and liabilities of the parties are
      transferred to the ZFS Group. Notwithstanding the fact that AZ and ZA do not
      legally cease to exist the combination of their activities results in the creation of a
      single economic unit. The Governing Agreement concluded between the parties
      provides that the respective memberships of board of directors of AZ, ZA and ZFS
      are converged in order to become and remain identical. Furthermore, the ZFS Group
      Articles of Incorporation and Organisational Rules also lead to a de facto
      amalgamation into a genuine common economic unit (see also case IV/M.660 -
      RTZ/CRA).
IV. Community dimension
7.    The combined aggregate world-wide turnover of Zürich and B.A.T., calculated in
      accordance with Article 5 (3) lit. b) of Regulation No. 4064/89, exceeds 5 000
      million ECU. Zurich and BAFS’s combined world-wide gross premiums are 27,31
      billion ECU (Zurich: 20.3 billion;, BAFS 7.01 billion ECU).
8.    Both Zurich and BAFS have a Community-wide turnover in excess of 250 million
      ECU, but they do not achieve more than two thirds of their aggregate Community-
      wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation
      therefore has a Community dimension, but does not constitute a co-operation case
      under the EEA Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
V. Compatibility with the Common Market
A.       Relevant product markets
9.    The parties are active in the following businesses: life and non-life insurance,
      reinsurance, asset management and regard these as separate markets. In the
      insurance sector a distinction is made between both life and non-life insurance and
      reinsurance. Reinsurance is a separate market because of its purpose of spreading
      risks between insurers. Life and non-life insurance can be divided into as many
      product markets as there are different kinds of risks covered. Their characteristics,
      premiums and purposes are distinct and there is typically no substitutability for the
      consumer between the different risks insured (see case IV/M. 812 - Allianz/Vereinte
      or case IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP). For the purpose of the present case it is, however, not
      necessary to define conclusively the relevant product markets as, even on the narrowest
      market definition, the concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position.
B.       Relevant geographical markets
                                                  2

10. The markets for life and non-life insurance are national as a result of national
     distribution channels, the established market structures, fiscal constraints and
     differing regulatory systems (see case M. 759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance). The
     markets for reinsurance and asset management are world wide in view of the need
     to pool risks on an international basis and the conduct of reinsurance business (see
     case M. 862 - Axa/UAP).
C.      Competitive Assessment
11. The geographical overlap between the activities of the parties is minimal and even
     where there is an overlap the increment in post merger market share is rather small.
     Concerning the different sectors where the new company will be active the situation
     is the following: the only overlaps in life insurance are in France, Portugal, Spain
     and UK (where both Zürich and BAFS are active). However, the combined market
     share of ZFS will be no more than 6.3% in none of the EEA countries.
12. Regarding non-life insurance the situation is similar: As regards individual product
     markets or risks insured in the non-life insurance sector, the combined share of the
     parties does not exceed 15% with the exception of three individual products: Those
     are private and commercial motors in Liechtenstein (15-25%; 25-35%) and marine
     navigation in Norway (15-25%). This does not lead to the creation of a dominant
     position. Moreover, the increase in market share lies only between 1% and 3 %. In
     travel insurance (personal accident, baggage, cancellation, medical expanses) BAFS
     has a market share of (33,5%) in the UK. However, as Zürich is not active in travel
     insurance in the UK there is no addition of market share.
13. The international reinsurance market is highly competitive. A comparison with the
     market leaders on the list of the 20 largest consolidated reinsurance groups world-
     wide, Munich Re (first ranked, net written premiums in 1995 amounted to 8835
     million ECU) and Swiss Re (second ranked, net written premiums in 1995
     amounted to 8046 million ECU), shows that Zurich (net written premiums in 1995
     amounted to 1849 million ECU) is ranked 8th and BAFS is not even on the list
     (ranking 24th). As concerns asset management the combined funds under
     management for 1996 totalled 269 billion ECU. The combined ZFS Group will rank
     7th in the list of top 10 North American and European fund managers.
14. As a result, it is not expected that the proposed concentration will create or
     strengthen a dominant position in any insurance and asset management markets.
VI. Ancillary restraints
15. The parties have requested that certain agreements concluded between them ought
     to be regarded as ancillary restraints:
16. In clause 11 of the Merger Agreement the parties have agreed that until closing they
     will carry out their business in ordinary course. In clause 13 of the Merger
     Agreement the parties the parties have agreed not solicit to sell or transfer any of the
     financial services activities of BAT and Zürich. In so far as these agreements can be
     considered to be restrictive these obligations are directly related and necessary for
     the implementation of the merger and can therefore be considered to be an ancillary
     restraint in the meaning of article 8 (2) of the Merger Regulation.
                                                  3

17. In clause 10 of the Governing Agreement the parties have agreed that neither ZA
     nor AZ will engage in other activities than investing in ZFS and will not compete
     with ZFS. This agreement is an essential element of the merger and therefore an
     integral part of it.
18. In clause 8 of the Deed of Indemnity and in clause 15 of the Governing Agreement
     the parties have agreed not to disclose confidential information which the parties
     hold in relation to the other party or in relation to ZFS group. According to clause
     8.1 of the Deed of Indemnity the part of the B.A.T. group not forming part of BAFS
     is obliged not to solicit within a period of two years any person which is employed
     in skilled or managerial work in ZFS. In so far as these agreements can be
     considered to be restrictive these provisions serve to protect the transfer the full
     value of the assets transferred to ZFS and can therefore be considered to be an
     ancillary restraint in the meaning of article 8 (2) of the Merger Regulation.
VII. Conclusion
19. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     concentration and to declare it compatible with the EEA Agreement. This decision
     is adopted in application of Article 6 (1) (b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No.
     4064/89.
                                                          For the Commission,
                                                  4
