                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 08.05.1998
                                                                               PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                            MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                        To the notifying parties:
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No. IV/M.1082 - Allianz/AGF
          Notification of 19 March 1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Commission
          Regulation No. 4064/1998
1.               On 19 March 1998 the Commission received a notification of a proposed
                 concentration by which the undertaking Allianz AG (“Allianz”) acquires sole
                 control over Assurances Générales de France (“AGF”) by means of a public bid
                 closed on 20 March 1998.
I. THE PARTIES INVOLVED AND THE OPERATION
2.               Allianz, with headquarters in Munich/Germany, is the leader of a group of
                 insurance companies active in all sectors of private insurance business and is one
                 of the largest industrial insurers in the EEA and third countries. Allianz acquired
                 the German credit insurer Hermes in 1996 (decision IV/M.813).
3.               AGF, with headquarters in Paris, is an insurance company active in life- and non-
                 life insurance and re-insurance in the EEA and world-wide. AGF is notably active
                 in credit insurance through its subsidiary Euler.
4.               By way of a public bid which was declared successful on 15 April 1998, Allianz
                 intends to acquire the majority of the shares in AGF. Such acquisition will grant
                 Allianz the majority of votes in AGF’s general assemblies. AGF will remain a
                 separate legal and publicly listed company. The proposed operation constitutes a
                 concentration according to Article 3 (1) (b) of the Merger Regulation.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

II. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.           Allianz and AGF have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover, calculated in
             accordance with Article 5 (3) (b) of the Regulation in excess of ECU 5,000
             million (Allianz: ECU 40,102 million; AGF: ECU 10,680 million). Each of them
             has a Community-wide turnover, calculated in accordance with article 5 (3) (b) of
             the Regulation of more than ECU 250 million (Allianz: ECU 30,975 million;
             AGF: ECU 9,183 million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
             aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
             The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension. It does not
             constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement pursuant to Article 57
             of that Agreement.
III. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
a) Life and non-life insurance without credit insurance
Relevant product markets
6.           The proposed concentration concerns the life and non-life insurance market. Both
             life and non-life direct insurance from the demand side can usually be divided into
             as many product markets as there are risks covered because their characteristics,
             premiums and purposes are distinct and there is typically no substitutability for the
             consumer between the different risks insured (see cases No IV/M.759 - Sun
             Alliance/Royal Insurance; IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP; IV/M.985 - Credit
             Suisse/Winterthur; IV/M.812 - Allianz/Vereinte).
Relevant geographic markets
7.           As far as life and non-life insurance for private households are concerned, the
             relevant markets seem at present to be mainly national, in view of the established
             market structures, the need for adequate distribution channels, fiscal constraints
             and differing national regulatory systems (see cases No IV/M.759 - Sun
             Alliance/Royal Insurance; IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP).
8.           As far as aviation insurance is concerned, the Commission in the Allianz/Vereinte
             case (No IV/M.812) considered that it has Community-wide dimension as far as
             large risks are insured. In the Axa/UAP decision (No IV/M.862) this view was
             confirmed for other high risk transport insurance markets such as navigation and
             space insurance.
9.           The parties consider that the geographic market for aviation insurance is a world-
             wide one, given the fact that only a small part of the gross premiums are
             generated in a domestic market, this circumstance indicating a world market. The
             French undertaking AGF-M.A.T. for example generates more than 80% of its
             MAT gross premiums with customers domiciled outside of France.
10.          However, a geographic definition of the markets for MAT can be left open
             because even with the narrowest market definition there are no serious doubts
             regarding its compatibility with the Common market or a substantial part of it.
                                                 2

Assessment
11.         The parties have overlapping activities in professional goods insurance, holiday
            insurance and maritime, transport and aviation insurance (MAT) in France, in
            liability insurance in Ireland, and in civil liability, household and accident insurance
            in Germany.
12.         In professional goods insurance in France, combined shares amount to around
            18%. Allianz/AGF even after the concentration will have a significantly smaller
            market share than the market leader Axa/UAP with around 25%. The same can
            be said about the market situation in the French holiday insurance market, where
            the parties achieve combined shares of 18.4%. The market leader is Mutuelles
            Assistances (19%) and there are a number of other important competitors with
            comparable market shares like Axa/UAP (16.8%) or Generali (14.8%).
13.         Concerning maritime transport insurance, estimated aggregated market shares
            amount to 27.8%, but the parties will have a significantly smaller market share
            than the market leader Axa/UAP (37.6%). On a European level the parties only
            achieve combined shares of about 7%. In aviation insurance combined market
            shares in France amount to approximately 31%. The main competitors in aviation
            in France are Axa/UAP (around 33%) and GAN (13%). On a European level
            market combined market shares are significantly lower.
14.         There will be combined market shares of about 27% in liability insurance in
            Ireland, but due to the fact that Allianz is hardly present on the Irish market, the
            increment of market shares will be less than 1%. Moreover, two strong
            competitors with shares of approximately 15% each will impede the creation of a
            dominant position in the Irish liability insurance market, notably Hibernian
            (15.2%) and Royal & Sun Alliance (14.8%).
15.         In civil liability insurance in Germany, aggregated market shares amount to
            approximately 19%, but the concentration will only produce a minimal addition of
            market shares due to the fact that AGF’s activities are limited to 0.15%. The
            same can be said, in principle, for household insurance and accident insurance in
            Germany. In household insurance and accident insurance combined market shares
            amount to 17.5% and 23.4% respectively with a rather negligible increment of
            0.02%. In all three market segments a dominant position cannot be assumed
            given the fact that the market is characterised by a considerable number of
            competitors with relevant market shares.
IV. CONCLUSION
16.         In view of the above-mentioned arguments it appears that the operation in the life
            and non-life insurance market -except credit insurance- does not create or
            strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would
            be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
b) Credit Insurance
Relevant product markets
                                                 3

17. The present concentration in particular affects one segment of the credit insurance
    market, namely the “delcredere” insurance in some Member States, in particular
    Italy, Belgium and UK. The Commission in the Allianz-Hermes Case (No. IV/M.
    813) identified six different segments of credit insurance: “delcredere”
    (comprising domestic credit insurance, export credit insurance and capital goods
    insurance), consumer credit insurance, fidelity insurance and guarantee insurance.
    Credit insurance products in general offer protection to suppliers of goods and
    services against the effect of insolvency of a debtor or extended late payments.
    Fidelity insurance and computer fraud insurance as explained in the
    Allianz/Hermes decision covers internal risks deriving from illicit actions
    committed by employees of the insured.
18. “Delcredere” or credit insurance in the narrow sense, as it is called, includes three
    types of insurance policies: domestic credit insurance, export credit insurance and
    capital goods insurance. Domestic credit insurance and export credit insurance
    protect the policy holders against insolvency of their clients in the domestic
    market and abroad. Export credit insurance can be further divided according to
    the kind of risks covered. In particular political risks are covered by special
    policies managed on behalf of the state acting as a re-insurer. In a number of
    countries this kind of policy is only offered by one specialised company. Capital
    goods insurance covers insolvency risks deriving from the purchase of
    installations and factories in the home market or abroad. Risks of capital goods
    are related to political risks as far as insurance services to large international
    companies are concerned. On an overall perspective the delcredere market
    comprises less than 3% of the non-life insurance sector and is characterised by a
    high degree of specialisation.
19. From a demand-side perspective, the above-mentioned delcredere insurance
    products can be said to cover similar risks, namely the risks of insolvency and
    non-performance of contracting partners. All three segments of delcredere are
    similar in scope. The only differentiation between domestic and export credit
    insurance is the location of the risk insured. From a supply-side view it can be
    observed that the majority of credit insurers offer combined policies in particular
    for domestic and export credit insurance and, moreover, premiums are calculated
    in a similar way.
20. The characteristics of delcredere differ from those of other credit insurance
    products like consumer credit insurance which only addresses banks and financial
    institutions. The requirements that apply to the delcredere business differ
    significantly from the other credit insurance business. In delcredere both the risk
    of losses and profit margins are higher than in other segments of credit insurance
    and general insurance. While the later can be based on developments calculated
    according to certain statistical principles, delcredere requires the evaluation of a
    huge number of different isolated risks as well as special credit management
    facilities combined with a profound knowledge of markets concerned. Each
    policy holder has to be scrutinised accordingly. Information on the client’s market
    can easily be purchased from specialised databases. The interpretation and
    consequent exploitation of those informations nevertheless requires a specialised
    data-processing system. The development of such systems from scratch is very
    time consuming and can take 8-10 years. Different market informations have to
    be evaluated and risks must be selected.
                                        4

21.         It follows from the above-explained facts that the delcredere market is
            characterised by considerable market entrance costs. Heavy investments, the
            appropriate know-how and sufficient human resources are needed in order to
            start activities in this sector. This view was largely confirmed by the
            Commission’s enquiries involving a representative number of competitors and
            clients of the parties. For the above-mentioned reasons and for the purposes of
            the present decision, the delcredere market will be examined as one separate
            product market.
22.         The parties claim that delcredere insurance products are increasingly
            substituted by services offered by banks in addition to their core lending
            activities, like factoring and letters of credit used in particular when credit
            insurance is not available or credit limits are insufficient to cover orders.
23.         It cannot be denied that certain bank products are increasingly entering the
            market as competitors of credit insurance products. Factoring adds the pre-
            financing element to the service rendered by credit insurers and factoring
            without recourse may even cover non-payment risk and provide credit
            protection. Certain bank products like factoring or letters of credit are
            appropriate supplementary products to credit insurance products.
24.         Nevertheless, according to the Commission’s findings these products by
            reason of their characteristics and prices are not yet sufficiently developed to
            substitute credit insurance products (see also Commission’s conclusion in the
            Allianz/Hermes Case No. IV/M. 813). Factoring companies concentrate on
            the financial side of the business. They often seek credit insurance themselves
            with insurance companies. In the course of their business relations with
            clients they often ask for the assignment of the indemnity of an underlying
            domestic and export credit insurance policy as a security. A policy holder
            may obtain financing more easily when presenting the security of a credit
            insurer protecting his debtor balances. Financial guarantees like factoring and
            invoice discounting do not provide prevention and risk analysis nor do they
            provide the transfer of a whole portfolio of buyers, but the factoring company
            selects acceptable risks. Factoring often does not cover political risks and due
            to the cession of claims the client loses control over the receivables.
Relevant geographic markets
25.         As far as the credit insurance segment is concerned, however, the Commission in
            the Allianz/Vereinte decision (case No. IV/M.812) and in the Allianz/Hermes
            decision (case No. IV/M.813) found that, especially for industrial and commercial
            policies, insurance markets are becoming more and more open to intra-
            community competition.
26.         In the delcredere insurance market (especially in the segment of export credit
            insurance), the trend to internationalization is particularly strong considering
            customers’ needs, suppliers’ business interests and the nature of the business.
            Multinational corporates especially require a wider geographical scope in terms of
            servicing their group wide operations. They have an interest to optimise coverage
            and benefits from scale effect. Policies designed for multinational companies have
                                               5

             to provide world-wide buyer and political cover on a group-wide basis from a
             single source. Large credit insurers serve their big customers and their foreign
             subsidiaries from a single point and with a global policy. Markets are becoming
             more European because of the liberalisation of European insurance markets, the
             world-wide re-insurance structures and the growing internationalisation of the
             business.
27.          Notwithstanding the growing internationalisation, delcredere, due to the
             characteristics of its product, also has a national dimension. Delcredere requires
             local support. Small and medium sized clients usually seek credit insurance with
             domestic companies. Policies are still mainly contracted on a local basis because
             detailed information is needed on the business of the insured, the financial
             situation of the customers and local economic structures. Local insurers as a rule
             are better prepared to meet these requirements than their foreign competitors. Big
             groups like Allianz and Coface which are present world-wide also fulfil these
             criteria. Other big insurers expand their network and/or their services in order to
             meet those requirements.
28.          Summarising the above-mentioned developments it can be concluded that
             domestic and export credit insurance represent a driving force in
             internationalisation and concentration of the market. Multinational customers
             prefer to obtain groupwide coverage from a single source. On the other hand,
             small firms and local business partners usually turn to local firms. Accordingly
             there are elements to support either a conclusion that the market is international in
             scope, or that it is national. The final definition of geographical markets, however,
             can be left open because the Commission, for the purposes of the present case,
             had to appraise the effects of the concentration on any alternative market affected.
Impact of the concentration on a national level
29.          In delcredere, the concentration will produce an addition of market shares in
             several national markets: the UK, Belgium, Italy, and Ireland due to existing
             activities of AGF/Euler’s subsidiaries.
30.          In the UK, the Euler subsidiary Trade Indemnity (TI) has approximately 50%
             shares in delcredere, whereas Hermes has only minor activities amounting to
             about 2%. The main competitors are NCM (36%), Coface LBF (5%) and
             AIG Europe (3%).
31.          Despite a considerable degree of concentration and the fact that the two main
             players have about 80% of the market shares in credit insurance, the UK
             market for credit insurance seems to be a highly competitive one. The short
             term credit insurance market has been fully privatised in 1991. One
             consequence of this privatisation was the entrance of several new companies
             since the early nineties.
32.          The major part of credit insurance policies are underwritten with brokers
             acting as intermediaries between the clients and the insurers. Brokers usually
             have a profound knowledge of their markets and contribute to effective
             competition in the UK by helping customers to exercise and consolidate their
             buying power. Any attempt by Hermes/Euler/TI to impose, together with
                                                  6

    NCM, unfair market conditions would be likely to provoke a loss of
    customers. As confirmed by clients and competitors a large number of broker
    have in the past 8 years contributed to reducing consumer fidelity.
33. The UK market can be regarded as “commission” driven. Clients are
    therefore able to seek out the best rates. Over the last years, premiums have
    fallen and market penetration has grown faster than premium income. The
    investigation of the Commission confirmed that the pressure of new
    competitors and the strong presence of brokers are stimulating competition.
    Therefore the creation or strengthening of a dominant position of the new
    entity as well as an oligopolistic dominance of both the new entity and NCM
    on the UK market can be excluded.
34. In Italy, AGF/Euler through its recently acquired subsidiary SIAC has
    between 66 and 70% in delcredere. The concentration will produce a rather
    small increment of 1.2%. There are three other competitors in the market
    with market activities of a certain relevance. Those are LA VISCONTEA
    with around 10% and Fiat-Toro and SIC with around 7% each. However,
    Fiat-Toro is mainly operating for Fiat group as a captive. The remaining 10%
    is shared among a dozen small competitors. Some of those small players are
    even tied to AGF/SIAC by co-insurance agreements. Therefore, given the
    importance of combined market shares, the absence of comparable
    competitors and the fact that Hermes will disappear as a competitor, it has to
    be examined if the concentration would strengthen a dominant position in
    Italy.
35. It has to be taken into account that Hermes entered the It alian market only
    recently and is mainly present in other credit insurance segment than
    delcredere. In delcredere its market shares are limited to 1.2%. With regard
    to the disappearance of Hermes as a potential strong player on the Italian
    market it has to be considered that the market situation in real terms did not
    change significantly when Hermes started its direct sales. SIAC has been
    market leader since 1929 and was the only firm active in delcredere for many
    years. Therefore, even with the strong support of Allianz, Hermes would not
    have been in the position, in the short or medium run, to seriously challenge
    the market position of SIAC. The only strong credit insurer currently able to
    successfully compete with SIAC is LA VISCONTEA.
36. This view was reflected in the decision of the Italian Antitrust Authority
    approving the take over of SIAC by AGF/Euler dated 31, March 1998. This
    approval was notably subject to undertakings submitted by the acquirer: AGF
    committed itself to divest its controlling interest in LA VISCONTEA (58%)
    held via Coface, notably without transfer to one of AGF’s subsidiaries or the
    Allianz group. According to the information supplied by the Italian
    Authorities, competitive concerns regarding a possible single market
    dominance of the parties could be removed by such a divestiture. In line with
    the appreciation of the national authority the Commission concludes that the
    impact of the concentration on the Italian market has to be assessed with a
    view to the structural links persisting between the two main players in Italy,
    Allianz/AGF/SIAC and Coface/LA VISCONTEA.
                                      7

37.          In Belgium, where the Euler-subsidiary COBAC has a market share in
             delcredere of about 43%, there is a very small overlap of activities, given the
             fact that Allianz/Hermes has a market share of only 0.7%. The first player in
             Belgium is Gerling (with over 50% of market shares). In Ireland, combined
             market shares amount to 53.7% (AGF/IC 50%, Allianz 38%) but it has to be
             taken into account that, since 1990, the Irish credit insurance market has become
             very competitive due to the successful entrance of new companies like NCM,
             Namur, Gerling, etc. Therefore, the strengthening of a dominant position in
             Belgium and Ireland cannot be expected.
38.          In France, where AGF/Euler has market shares of 43 %, the increment of market
             shares is negligible since Allianz/Hermes has only 0.4%. Nevertheless, as in Italy,
             the concentration will lead to the disappearance of a strong potential competitor.
             The parties state that, as a consequence of the proposed concentration,
             competition in the French market will on the contrary be further enhanced, given
             the fact that AGF will sell its controlling interest in Coface and there will be two
             independent credit insurers active on the French market. At present Euler in the
             French market is operating in domestic, Coface in export credit insurance.
             Notwithstanding the existence of high market entrance costs in delcredere, there
             is no evidence that each of the companies in question could not enter the
             complementary market segment, given the fact that both dispose of sufficient
             knowledge on all three delcredere segments. Moreover both companies through
             their alliance “Eurexel” are familiar with the demand-side of both export and
             domestic products. For these reasons Coface appears to be able to be in a
             position to enter the domestic segment without difficulties. On the other hand,
             Euler is present in export credit insurance via some of its subsidiaries already to
             date.
39.          In much the same way as the analysis applied to the Italian market, the impact of
             the concentration on the French market has to be assessed with a view to the
             links persisting between AGF/Euler and Coface.
40.          In Germany, where Allianz/Hermes holds about 40% in delcredere, there will be
             no addition of market shares because both Allianz and AGF will sell their
             respective shares in the German credit insurer Aachener and Münchener
             Beteiligungsgesellschaft (AMB) and AGF will further lose control of Allgemeine
             Kreditversicherungs-AG (AKV), a subsidiary of Coface. Provided that Coface,
             through AKV, will continue to actively compete with Hermes, no substantial
             effect on the German market is expected.
Conclusion
41.          It can be concluded that, considering market structures, past competitive
             behaviour and the real effect in market shares produced by the present take-over,
             a dominant position impeding competition on the Common market is not likely to
             be created by the mere addition of market shares.
Impact of the concentration on a European level
42.          Market shares in delcredere in general are difficult to obtain because of lack of
             reliable statistics which are only available for the services rendered by specialised
                                                8

             credit insurers. National statistics often do not reflect activities pursued by market
             participants domiciled abroad. At any rate, it can be said that in Europe, there are
             only a few big players on the market, accounting for the bulk of market shares:
             AGF/Euler, the market leader, has between 27 and 32%, Allianz/Hermes has
             between 12 and 14%, the third player, Coface, has around 16% market shares,
             Gerling between 13 and 15% and NCM around 12%.
43.          For the purposes of the present case, if the European part of delcredere (in
             particular the export credit business) could be defined as a geographically
             separated market, the combined market shares of the parties would amount to
             approximately 39-46, representing almost three times that of the next player
             (Coface: 16%) and about three times as much as the third competitor, Gerling
             (13-15%).
44.          However, even if there are considerable costs, some recent market entrances
             show that there are no barriers to entry in the strict sense (see Gothaer, AIG,
             R und V). Market shares of newcomers in delcredere show a slower growth
             rate than in other credit insurance segments. But this is due to the need to
             follow strict underwriting rules and criteria on export risks. Moreover, the
             new entity will face competition from other players also active at international
             level, such as Gerling and NCM. Therefore, there is evidence of sufficient
             competition to dismiss the risk that the concentration as such could raise
             serious doubts.
Conclusion
45.          Summarising the above-mentioned arguments, it can be concluded that the
             mere addition of market shares produced by the Allianz/AGF take over as
             such does not result in the creation of a dominant position. Those market
             shares, however, could present a problem if the number of competitors is
             further reduced and if traditional big players are in a position to use their
             competitive advantages resulting from the size of their business in order to
             keep out potential new competitors and divide up markets. This conclusion is
             not affected by the fact that Hermes enjoys in Germany a monopoly for the
             provision of state subsidized policies covering political risks.
Existing links between AGF and Coface
46.          In the present case, there is a number of structural and co-operative links
             between AGF and Coface, the present AGF-subsidiary supposed to be a
             future competitor. Coface is an internationally active insurer specialising in
             export credits to the French Government.
47.          At present, AGF is active in credit insurance via its subsidiaries Euler in which it
             holds a 68% participation, and Coface in which it has a 58.06% stake (direct
             participation amounts to 41.5 % and indirect participation via Euler to 16.5%).
48.          According to a contract with some of the present shareholders in Coface,
             namely SCOR, Paribas, Natexis and Crédit Agricole on a redistribution of
             shares in Coface, AGF at the time of the take-over is supposed to reduce its
             stakes in Euler to 51% and in Coface to 24.9%. This reduction also forms part of
                                                  9

              the public bid and is subject to a written commitment to the French Ministry of
              Finance. After the reduction AGF will keep control over Euler [...] 1 but will at the
              same time lose sole control over Coface.
49.           Whereas AGF with a stake of less than 25% will no longer be able to exercise
              sole control over Coface, it will retain close links with the company. Coface
              holds 5% in Euler while AGF/Euler holds 24.9% in Coface. SCOR is one of
              the main re-insurers of AGF/Euler and the first re-insurer of Coface. SCOR
              will also be the main shareholder in Coface (45.2%), holding at the same time
              14% in Euler. Although there is no shareholder agreement between SCOR
              and AGF, there is the risk that AGF and SCOR could exercise a decisive
              influence on the company by pooling their voting rights. The special situation of
              business interests between the re-insurer and its clients is appropriate to
              discourage competition between AGF/Euler and Coface. Those aspects are
              strong indications for a likely de facto joint control of AGF and SCOR over
              Coface.
50.           The fact that SCOR and AGF are the only shareholders in Coface disposing of a
              sufficient experience in delcredere business provides a further incentive for SCOR
              and AGF to act in agreement as regards strategic decision marking process in
              Coface. The other shareholders are: Natexis, the outcome of a merger of Banque
              de Commerce Extérieur and Crédit National holds 20.2%; Crédit Agricole,
              representing the organisation of various local and regional savings banks, has
              5.1%; SAFR (controlled by the holding company Partner Re, owned by Swiss
              Re) has 2% and the employees have about 2%. Natexis, the only remaining
              shareholder with a significant participation is not active in the insurance business
              and entered the share capital as a financial investor.
51.           Moreover, personal links exist on both sides of the managing boards of
              AGF/Euler and Coface. Several members of the management board of AGF are
              members of the management or supervisory board of Coface, while members of
              Coface are also represented in the management board of AGF/Euler.
52.           In addition, there are co-operative links existing between Coface and AGF/Euler.
              The companies in 1991 formed the alliance “Eurexel” with the help of which they
              offer a combined policy covering both domestic and export credit risks. With the
              help of this alliance AGF/Euler since 1995 provide a combined credit insurance
              policy including both domestic and export credit risks to meet the special business
              requirements of a limited number of multinational clients.
53.           The two companies are also co-operating through a European interest group
              called “Eurogate”. Eurogate is a co-operation of business investigation companies
              offering business informations also needed for credit insurance. The founding
              members of Eurogate are Bürgel, a subsidiary of Hermes, Graydon Holding, joint
              venture between Hermes, Coface and NCM and SCRL S.A., a subsidiary of
              Coface.
1   Deleted. Business secrets.
                                                 10

54.          Furthermore Coface and a joint venture between AGF and Turkish Financial
             Institution Dogus intend to set up a credit insurance joint venture in Turkey.
55.          Finally there is a fronting agreement between Coface and AGF/Euler for Japan
             under which one company can underwrite insurance policies on behalf and for the
             account of the other.
Impact of existing links between AGF and Coface on national level
56.          Due to accumulation of links between AGF/Euler and Coface, there is the risk
             that the two companies will not compete on the market but act in a
             complementary manner dividing up product and geographical markets.
57.          In Italy, Hermes/Euler/SIAC have a dominant position due to combined
             market shares of 67%-70%. Assuming that Coface/LA VISCONTEA, being
             the second largest player with more than 10%, will not compete with the
             parties due to existing close links and common interests, the next real
             competitor SIC would only have 7.1%. This fact would raise serious doubts
             as to its compatibility with the common market or a substantial part of it.
58.          In France, Euler and Coface already dominated the credit insurance market.
             Direct effect of the concentration is the disappearance of Hermes as a
             potential competitor. This effect would be only counterbalanced if Coface
             would emerge as a viable competitor.
Impact of existing links between AGF and Coface on a European level
59.          Similar to the situation on the Italian and French markets, the accumulation of
             links between Allianz/AGF and Coface, the number one and two credit insurers in
             Europe could create or strengthen a dominant position if competition between the
             two companies is not sufficiently guaranteed. This view has been developed by a
             complainant.
60.          The delcredere market in Europe at present is controlled by a few global players.
             There are historic reasons for this picture. In some countries like Germany and
             France, export credit insurance involving political risks was taken on only by
             quasi-governmental agencies due to the historic separation between domestic
             and export credit insurance products. In the above-mentioned countries
             Coface and Hermes still play an important role because they have the
             exclusive right to offer state subsidised export credit guarantees. This
             competitive advantage has been pointed out by a competitor.
61.          Export credit business contributes to an improved reputation and acceptance
             of an insurance company by its clients. A business relationship in delcredere
             often serves as a catalyst to open up business relations on other insurance
             products provided by the same company. Thus, the conclusion of a credit
             insurance policy in delcredere involving negotiations with the superior
             management of a company, frequently paves the way to increasing
             underwriting capacity.
                                               11

62.           As pointed out by Allianz, one of the strategic aims of the concentration is the
              building of a European market leadership. The new entity Hermes/Euler will
              indeed be the market leader in the European market. After the concentration, the
              parties will enjoy a very strong market position and have shares amounting to 39-
              46% which is three times more than their second competitor Coface with 16%.
              The distance to the next competitor, Gerling (13%) will be significantly larger.
63.           Considering the above-described critical addition in market share, any
              circumstance de facto reducing the number of existing competitors and/or
              discouraging competition between them could give rise to significant doubts with
              regard to the creation or strengthening of a dominant position. Supposing that
              Allianz/AGF and Coface stick to the markets where they have a leading
              position keeping out other competitors, this would impede effective
              competition in the Common Market. Such a tendency could as well interfere
              with the liberalisation of European insurance markets in the long run.
Conclusion
64.           Therefore it is the Commission’s conclusion that the operation, in its notified
              form, raises serious doubts as to the creation or strengthening of a dominant
              position in the European delcredere market.
V. UNDERTAKINGS SUBMITTED BY THE PARTIES
65.           In application of Article 6 (2) of the Merger Regulation the parties presented
              a commitment to the Commission. The text of these undertakings is annexed
              and forms an integral part of this decision.
66.           According to these commitments AGF after clearance of the present
              concentration will sell [...]2 shares in Coface to buyers not belonging to the
              AGF/Allianz group. Furthermore, [...] 2 the members of the managing board
              of AGF will leave the management board of Coface. Any other personal links
              existing between companies owned/controlled by one of the parties and
              companies belonging to Coface will be removed.
67.           Nevertheless, any acquisition of 5% or more shares in Coface is subject to
              approval of the French Ministry of Economy and Finance. In the case this
              approval cannot be obtained, the parties would therefore offer to the
              Commission an equivalent solution excluding any influence of AGF over
              Coface.
Assessment
68.           In line with the Commission’s practice concerning commitments in first
              phase, [...]2 a divestiture of AGF’s shares in combination with the removal of
              all personal links would be appropriate to clearly resolve an identifiable
              problem, namely the possible creation or strengthening of a dominant position
2   Deleted. Business secrets.
                                                12

              impeding effective competition both on the national and international level.
              The present problem is of limited scope because it only concerns one small
              part of the overall insurance market affected by the concentration.
69.           After the execution of the undertakings proposed by the parties, the
              remaining links between Coface and AGF will in their present state not in
              themselves constitute obstacles to effective competition on the Common
              Market or a substantial part of it.
70.           Concerning “Eurexel”, this agreement does not contain any clause excluding
              competition between the participants. The alliance though showing
              considerable growth rate has a rather limited scope of activities and annual
              gross premiums of about ECU [...] 3. Eurexel since introduction of a common
              policy in 1995 has acquired [...]3 contracts.
71.           Concerning Eurogate it can be said that the services rendered by this co-
              operation are offered to any company interested in investigating the rating of
              a customer with whom it wants to enter into business, as well as to credit
              insurance companies who need this information for their credit insurance
              cover. To the information of the Commission there are no barriers to the
              access to such information. The fact that the parties and Coface and NCM
              jointly control the founding members of Eurogate does not have any impact
              on the principal of open access.
72.           Concerning the Turkish joint venture, only a letter of intent has been signed
              between AGF/Bogus and Coface. In any event the parent company AGF
              claims not to have been aware of this project, which was decided on a local
              level, because the AGF/Bogus joint venture is not under AGF’s control.
              Furthermore the project seems only to be limited to Turkey.
73.           Concerning the fronting business the Commission was informed by the parties
              that such agreements are quite common in the insurance industry in cases
              where a primary insurance company or a re-insurance company for legal or
              other reasons is unable to participate directly in granting the insurance cover.
              Such agreements have also been concluded by other competitors for the same
              reasons.
74.           For the above-mentioned reasons the Commission came to the conclusion
              that the above-described commitments represent a sufficient remedy to
              eliminate the effect of the remaining structural links between AGF and Coface
              in order to ensure that the two companies act as independent competitors on
              the market. The proposed commitments would eliminate any risk that AGF
              could exercise decisive influence over Coface together with the main
              shareholder SCOR (45%) or by other means. Naturally, this is without
              prejudice of the possible application of Article 85 to the co-operation
              between AGF and Coface.
3   Deleted. Business secrets.
                                               13

75.       The competent authorities of the Member States after h aving been informed
          of the parties’ commitments agreed that the present proposals would be
          sufficient to remove competitive concerns.
VI. FINAL CONCLUSION
76.       Consequently, the Commission concludes that, subject to full compliance with
          the commitments made by AGF, as set out in its letter to the Commission of
          April 1998, the proposed concentration will not create or strengthen a
          dominant position, as a result of which effective competition would be
          significantly impeded in the common market or a substantial part of it.
77.       For the above reasons, and subject to the full compliance with the
          commitments made by AGF and Allianz, the Commission has decided not to
          oppose the notified operation and to declare it compatible with the common
          market and with the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application
          of Article 6 (1) b of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 (as amended by
          Council Regulation No 1310/97).
                                                     For the Commission,
                                          14
