5.    On 23 September 1997, the boards of Woodchester and GE Capital agreed the terms
      of recommended cash offers which were made on 21 October 1997 on behalf of GE
      Capital for the purpose of acquiring the whole of the issued share capital of
      Woodchester. Crédit Lyonnais has irrevocably undertaken to accept the offers in
      respect of its entire shareholding of Woodchester. After the completion of the
      operation, GE Capital will acquire control of Woodchester. Thus the operation
      constitutes a concentration according to Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
II.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.    The combined aggregate world-wide turnover of GE and Woodchester exceeds
      ECU 5.000 million. The turnover for the non-financial activities of GE amounts to
      ECU [...]1 million. The turnover of Woodchester calculated in accordance with
      Article 5 of the Merger Regulation, exceeds ECU 324 million. Each of them has a
      Community-wide turnover in excess of ECU 250 million, and they do not achieve
      more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and
      the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community
      dimension.
III. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
a)     Relevant product market
7.    The areas in which the parties’ activities overlap relate principally to financing the
      use of assets. Both GE Capital and Woodchester finance a wide range of equipment
      including plant and machinery, office equipment, computers, telecomunications
      equipment (“equipment”). Similarly both parties provide finance in respect of
      passenger and commercial vehicles (“vehicles”).
8.    Equipment finance and vehicle finance are areas of asset finance within the broader
      lending sector where banks, specialised companies and other finance institutions
      operate.
9.    However, for the purposes of the present case, it is not necessary to further delineate
      the relevant product market since, in all alternative market definitions considered,
      effective competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any
      substantial part of that area.
 b)    Relevant geographic market
10. From a geographic point of view, the lending services provided by banks,
      specialised finance companies and other finance institutions for the financing of
      assets have tended to be considered national in scope in previous Commission
      decisions.
11. However, for the purposes of the present case it is not necessary to further delineate
      the relevant geographic market since, in all alternative market definitions
1 Deleted business secret.
                                                 2

      considered, effective competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or
      any substantial part of that area.
c)       Assessment
12. The notifying party, GE Capital, submits that there are no affected markets in this
      case and, according to the information it has supplied to the Commission, the parties
      to the concentration are not engaged in any area of business activities where the
      concentration leads to a combined market share of 15% or more.
13. The principal areas of the asset finance sector in which the parties’ activities overlap
      are :
         - Equipment finance in the United Kingdom and in Denmark, in which the
         parties’ combined share does not exceed [...] 2 in either of the countries
         concerned;
         - Vehicle finance in the United Kingdom, Denmark and Portugal, in which the
         parties’ combined share does not exceed [...]3 in any of the countries concerned.
         After the operation the asset finance sector in each of the above-mentioned
         countries will remain fragmented with a large number of finance companies and
         banks on it.
d)       Conclusion
14. Given the lack of any significative competitive impact due to the present operation,
      it is considered that the proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a
      dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly
      impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
IV.    CONCLUSION
15. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
      operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and the functioning
      of the EEA agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of
      Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                         For the Commission,
2 Deleted business secret : less than 15%.
3 Deleted business secret : less than 15%.
                                                 3

4