4.     By the transaction all the activities of both groups, i.e. Merita and Nordbanken, will be brought
       under the group holding company, MeritaNordbanken. The group holding company will
       operate as one single group under one single managament. The decision making body will be
       composed of an equal number of members respectively appointed by Merita and Nordbanken.
       However, the current operations of Merita will continue to operate under the name Merita and
       the current operations of Nordbanken will continue to operate under the name Nordbanken.
II.    CONCENTRATION
5.      The merger between two previously independent undertakings, Merita and Nordbanken, will
        constitute a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.      The notifying parties have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of ECU 5,000
        million (Merita, ECU 5,067 million; and Nordbanken, ECU 4,635 million). Each of them has
        a Community-wide turnover in excess of ECU 250 million (Merita, ECU 4,630 million; and
        Nordbanken, ECU 4,577 million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
        aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified
        operation therefore has a Community dimension.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
       A. Relevant product markets
7.     The Commission has consistently held that the services typically supplied by a universal bank
       may be divided into the following areas: retail banking, corporate banking and financial
       market services.1 In particular, the distinction between retail and corporate banking is relevant
       for the purposes of assessing market conditions.2 With regard to Finland and Sweden, the
       investigation confirmed this view.
8.     By retail banking is meant banking services to households which consist, for example, of
       deposits, lending, credit cards and mutual funds and other forms of asset management. By
       corporate banking is meant banking services to corporate clients which consists, for example,
       of deposits, lending, international payments, letters of credit and advice concerning mergers
       and acquisitions. With respect to financial markets the following activities may constitute
       distinct service markets: trading in equities, bonds, and derivatives, foreign exchange and
       money markets (i.e. treasury bills and commercial paper from banks and companies).
9.     For the purpose of the present case it is, however, not necessary to define conclusively the
       relevant product markets because, even on the narrowest market definition, the concentration
       does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition
       would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
1 See, for example, Case IV/M.342 - Fortis/CGER and Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt.
2 Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt.
                                                          2

       B. Relevant geographic markets
10. The notifying parties state that the relevant geographic markets are either national or
       international in scope depending on the specific banking sector. Retail banking and corporate
       banking are in most cases considered to be national in scope. The situation may, however,
       change in the future as a result of single currency and of new technologies. Investment
       banking and the financial markets have normally an international dimension.
11. The Commission has stated in previous cases3 that with regard to retail banking the relevant
       geographic market is to be considered national in scope due to the competitive conditions
       which in individual Member States are still different despite the increasing trend towards
       internationalisation, and due also to the importance of a network of branches. As far as the
       situation in Finland and in Sweden is concerned, the results of the investigation have
       confirmed this view. There are, however, indications that the present situation may change in
       the longer term with the introduction of the single currency and new technologies, e.g. internet
       and telephone banking.
12. With regard to corporate banking the Commission has generally taken the view that certain
       product segments will continue to be required and supplied at national level.4 However, some
       sectors of corporate banking seem to have a more international dimension. The results of the
       investigation in Finland and in Sweden confirm this view. The results also indicate that the
       relevant geographic market appears to be national for small and medium-sized corporate
       clients and international for large corporate clients. Furthermore, for the financial market the
       relevant geographic market appears to be international in scope.
13. However, whether the markets are considered to be national or international need not be finally
        decided in the present case because, on the basis of the assessment set out below, even on the
        narrowest market definition, the concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant
        position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA
        or any substantial part of that area.
       C. Assessment
       Banking
14. With regard to retail banking and financial markets Merita and Nordbanken are solely active in
       their domestic markets. Thus, their activities are primarily geographically complementary. The
       only minor overlaps are in sectors of corporate banking in Finland and in Sweden.
15.     Merita is the most important and largest financial institution in Finland. In corporate banking
        its market share for lending is 19.2% and for deposits 50%. Nordbanken is the third largest
        bank in Sweden. In corporate banking its market share for lending is 14.4 % and for deposits
        16.4%. The minor overlaps in the Finnish market exist in the markets for corporate lending
        where Nordbanken has a market share of 1% and in the markets for corporate deposits where
        Nordbanken has a market share below 0.1%. The minor overlaps in the Swedish market exist
3 For example, Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt and Case IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
4 See, for example, Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt.
                                                           3

       in the markets for corporate deposits where Merita has a market share below 1%. As shown,
       the overlaps are insignificant.
16.    In Finland, there are two strong well established players - Okobank and Postipankki - who
       have the ability to compete effectively with MeritaNordbanken. In corporate banking
       Okobank’s market share for lending is [...]5 and for deposits [...]6. Postipankki is
       Nordbanken’s counterpart in Finland and provides banking services also through post offices.
       In corporate banking its market share for lending is [...]7 and for deposits [...]8. In Sweden, the
       three major players in the market where overlap exists, i.e. corporate deposits, are
       Handelsbanken with [...]9 market share, SE-banken with [...]10 market share and
       FöreningsSparbanken with [...]11 market share. Each of these competitors offers a comparable
       product range to the combined entity. In addition, the Finnish and Swedish markets should be
       seen in the context of the ongoing restructuring of the financial market in the Nordic
       countries.
17.    Legal and regulatory barriers to entry, in the form of government authorisations etc., have
       traditionally been important in the banking sector. However, the entry of Finland and Sweden
       to the European Union has resulted in the deregulation of financial activities. The highly
       innovative and evolving nature of the banking market combined with the recent increase of
       electronic banking tools may further contribute to easier access to the market.
18.    The Commission’s investigation has shown that market entry in Finland by foreign banks is
       considered to be possible and likely. Several major Nordic banks have already entered the
       Finnish market and future expension plans cannot be excluded. The investigation also
       indicates that the possibility to enter the Finnish market will be further increased following
       EMU in 1999.
19.    In principle Nordbanken might have been a potential entrant and thus the situation of an
       elimination of potential competitor would have occured. The result of the investigation
       indicates that Nordbanken would probably not have entered the Finnish market, at least on its
       own. It should also be noted that Nordbanken withdrew from the Finnish market a few years
       ago. Even if Nordbanken would have been a possible entrant to the Finnish market, it would
       only have been one among several potential entrants.
       Insurance
5 Deleted for publication: between 5-15 %.
6 Deleted for publication: between 25-35 %.
7 Deleted for publication: between 0-10 %.
8 Deleted for publication: between 15-25 %.
9 Deleted for publication: between 25-35 %.
10 Deleted for publication: between 15-25 %.
11 Deleted for publication: between 10-20 %.
                                                       4

20.    The parties’ market positions concerning the insurance market are the following: Merita has a
       market share of 26% for life insurance in Finland and Nordbanken has 1.5% in Sweden. The
       Finnish banks - Okobank and Postipankki - have also established life insurance companies
       within their corporate groups. The market share for Okobank is [...]12 and for Postipankki
       [...]13. Despite the entry of bank life insurance companies, the non-bank insurance companies
       still continue to account for the majority of the market. The results of the investigation show
       that the proposed merger does not have any significant effect on Merita’s position in the
       insurance market.
      Conclusion
21. Based on the above, Merita has a strong position in the Finnish market. However, the present
      merger does not reinforce its position, either in the banking sector or insurance sector,
      whereby effective competition would be significantly impeded. The financial power of
      Nordbanken will not significantly reinforce Merita’s position either. The investigation
      confirmed these findings. On the contrary, EMU, further internationalisation and deregulation
      of financial activities could erode, in the future, the present position of Merita. Consequently,
      the proposed concentration does not strengthen a dominant position as a result of which
      effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
      area.
IV. CONCLUSION
22. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and to
      declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
      Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
      (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                                 For the Commission,
12 Deleted for publication: between 5-15 %.
13 Deleted for publication: between 0-10 %.
                                                        5
