                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 16.02.1998
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                    To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject:        Case No IV/M.1090 - GUARDIAN ROYAL EXCHANGE ASSURANCE
                PLC (‘GREA’)/PPP HEALTHCARE GROUP PLC (‘PPP’)
                Notification of 13.01.98 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No
                4064/89
1.      On 13.01.98, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
        pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by which the
        undertaking GREA, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Guardian Royal Exchange plc
        (GRE), acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control
        of the whole of the issued share capital of PPP by way of purchase of shares.
2.      After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
        operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does
        not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
        EEA Agreement.
I.      THE PARTIES' ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
3.      The business activities of the undertakings concerned are :
        -     for GREA and GRE: life and general insurance underwriting and administration,
              financial services and investments, worldwide;
        -     for PPP :private medical insurance underwriting and administration and associated
              services, principally in the United Kingdom.
4.      Both parties are active in private medical insurance (PMI), almost exclusively in the
        UK. PMI insures individuals and groups against the costs of private medical
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

     treatment, essentially for acute conditions. In the UK, customers buy PMI if they
     wish to supplement state-funded treatment (under the National Health Service -
     NHS), notably by earlier access to treatment in non-urgent cases, and a private bed or
     room in hospital. At present, around 10% of the UK population is covered by PMI of
     some kind.
II.  COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.   GRE and PPP have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover (1996) in excess of
     ECU 5,000 million (GRE, ECU 5,232 million; and PPP ECU 885 million ). Each of
     them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of ECU 250 million (GRE, ECU
     3,889 million; and PPP, ECU 863 million), but they do not achieve more than two-
     thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member
     State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension, but does not
     constitute a cooperation case under the EEA Agreement.
III.  COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
     A. Relevant product market(s)
6.   The notifying parties suggest that the relevant product market is that for all non-life
     insurance. However, it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant product
     markets because, in all alternative market definitions considered, effective
     competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of
     that area.
     B. Relevant geographic market(s)
7.   The notifying parties state that the relevant geographic market is the UK. However,
     it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant geographic markets because, in all
     alternative geographic market definitions considered, effective competition would not be
     significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
     C. Assessment
8.   On the basis of a product market for all non-life insurance, the parties’ combined
     share in the UK (net premium income, 1996) would be approximately 5% (increment
     to GREA 2%). On any wider geographic basis the shares would be smaller, and
     there are only minimal overlaps outside the UK. On the narrowest plausible
     alternative product market definition, private medical insurance (PMI), the parties’
     combined share would be 30% in the UK, although the increment would be only 3%.
     PPP is the second-largest supplier in the UK of PMI, behind BUPA (which
     specialises in PMI and has approximately 42%). GREA, on the other hand, ranks
     only sixth. Entry barriers into PMI do not appear significant, at least for established
     life and/or general insurers. Several have entered the sector, which is broadly
     profitable and expanding, in recent years, notably Norwich Union (which has taken a
     share of 8% in some six years) and Legal and General, which entered in 1996. There
     remain a number of other large insurers well-established in the UK who do not offer
                                              2

      PMI at present but appear capable of .doing so, and so constitute potential
      competitors.
9.    In view of the these factors, the notified operation will have only a minimal impact
      on competition in the EEA. Consequently, the proposed concentration does not create
      or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
      significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
IV.   ANCILLARY RESTRICTIONS
10.   The operation includes a non-compete clause, under which PPP healthcare
      foundation limited (holding company for the PPP group) undertakes that for a period
      of three years from the date of the operation it will not carry on a competing
      business, solicit customers for such a business, or solicit the services of senior
      employees from the merged business. In addition there are trade mark agreements
      [1 ...]. The non-compete clause is of the type envisaged as ancillary by paragraph
      III.A.1 of the Commission notice on ancillary restrictions. It has the normal scope
      for cases involving the sale of a business, and given that PMI insurance products
      generally have a long life cycle, and that individual customers, at least, are likely to
      remain loyal to their chosen insurer for several years, its length may also be
      considered acceptable within the terms of paragraph III.A.2 of the Commission
      notice. The trade mark agreements can also be regarded as ancillary, in that the PPP
      trademark is a valuable part of the assets of the PPP business; 2 [...] paragraphs
      III.B.2 and 4 of the Commission notice refer.
V.    CONCLUSION
11.   For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
      operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
      Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
      Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                      For the Commission,
1   Deleted for publication
2   Deleted for publication
                                              3
