     the purpose. GB Company is in turn a wholly owned subsidiary of The Grand
     Bookmaking Holdings Limited (“GB Holdings”). GB Holdings’ authorised share
     capital of £1 000 is divided into 100 000 shares of £0.01 each. Only one share in
     GB Holdings has been issued, and this is owned by [...]1 which is formally the
     ultimate parent company of the group through which the acquisition is being carried
     out.
5.   Part of the financing for the acquisition of the Blueslate subsidiaries is being
     provided by Nomura International to GB Holdings. GB Holdings has issued [...]2
     warrants, pursuant to the terms of a warrant instrument. These warrants are all
     currently held by Nomura International. [...]2. This mechanism (referred to
     hereinafter as “the [...]2 warrant arrangement”) gives Nomura International the
     power to acquire up to [...]2 of the share capital of GB Holdings.
III     THE CONCENTRATION
6.   In the notification it was argued that the [...]2 warrant arrangement gave Nomura the
     possibility to exercise decisive influence, and hence sole control over GB Holdings,
     within the meaning of Article 3(3) of the Merger Regulation. As to whether GB
     Holdings or GB Company were also acquiring control it was submitted that, in line
     with the principles to be found in paragraph 10 of the Commission Notice on the
     notion of a concentration (94/C 385/02), GB Holdings and GB Company should be
     regarded merely as vehicles for the acquisition, who did not acquire any control on
     their own account.
7.   The Commission however does not regard the [...]2 warrant arrangement on its own
     as capable of giving Nomura International sole control for the purpose of the
     Regulation. It notes that, from the point of view of the warrant holder, the
     arrangement is effectively a share purchase option. Paragraph 15 of the
     Commission’s notice on the notion of a concentration (94/C 385/02) sets out the
     general principle that “an option to purchase or convert shares cannot in itself
     confer sole control unless the option will be exercised in the near future according
     to a legally binding agreement. However the likely exercise of such an option can
     be taken into account as an additional element which, together with other elements,
     may lead to the conclusion that there is sole control”.
8.   In the course of investigation it was established that the parent of GB Holdings, [...]1
     has an authorised share capital of [...]2, divided into [...]2 ordinary shares of [...]2
     each, of which [...]2 have been issued and are held by unconnected individuals, [...]3.
     The articles of association of [...]1 provide that if a member becomes bankrupt, dies
     or suffers from a mental disorder then he can be called upon by the directors to
     transfer any shares registered in his name to such person or persons as may be
     nominated by the directors. [...]3. Any compulsory transfer made pursuant to the
     articles of association or [...]3 is made at market value, being a price agreed between
1   Deleted. Business secret: name of private company.
2   Deleted. Business secret.
3   Deleted. Business secret: refers to mechanisms by which Nomura International acquires sole control
    under the Merger Regulation.
                                                       2

    the shareholder concerned and the directors. Failing agreement, the market value is
    determined by the directors of [...]1. The directors may, in their absolute discretion,
    refuse to register any transfer of shares in [...]1. [...]1 currently has two directors,
    who do not hold shares, but [...]2. Additional directors can be appointed by any
    member or members holding a majority in nominal value of the issued share capital.
9.  [...]2. Thus while Nomura International may not be the formal holder of the rights
    conferring control over [...]1, the arrangement gives it a substantial level of
    influence over how the company is run.
10. [...]2.
IV      COMMUNITY DIMENSION
11. It was suggested initially that the only ‘undertaking concerned’ on the acquiring
    side was Nomura International, and that neither [...]1, GB Holdings nor GB
    Company were undertakings concerned, because Nomura International was
    acquiring sole control of the Blueslate subsidiaries through its control over GB
    Holdings by means of the [...]3 warrant arrangement.
12. As Nomura is a financial institution, the threshold figures for world-wide and
    Community-wide turnover for the purposes of Article 1(2) of the Regulation have to
    be calculated in accordance with the provisions of Article 5(3). Thus for world-
    wide turnover the relevant figure is one-tenth of total assets. For community-wide
    turnover the figure is one-tenth of total assets, multiplied by the ratio between loans
    and advances to credit institutions and customers in transactions with Community
    residents and the total sum of those loans and advances. On this basis one-tenth of
    Nomura International’s total assets is ECU 7 799 million, and the figure for
    community-wide turnover is ECU 1 465 million.
13. A question arose as to whether the Nomura Group should be considered, for the
    purposes of Article 5(4) of the Regulation to have over [...]1 or any of its
    subsidiaries any of the rights or powers listed in Article 5(4)(b), and hence whether
    any turnover from the [...]1 group should be included. The particular issue for
    consideration was whether [...]2 or the [...]3 warrant arrangement might fall within
    any of the categories in the 5(4)(b) list of rights and powers. If such a finding were
    made, then the undertakings whose turnover would also need to be brought into
    account would include not only the [...]1 group, but also all other investment
    interests in relation to which Nomura International had devised similar [...]3
    mechanisms.
14. It was accepted that the turnover of the [...]1 group ([...]3 in total) was not sufficient
    to have any impact on the question of jurisdiction for the purpose of this
    notification. The notifying party also confirmed that, even if the turnover of all
    other UK business activities controlled by Nomura International through similar
1  Deleted. Business secret: name of private company.
2  Deleted. Business secret: refers to mechanisms by which Nomura International acquires sole control
   under the Merger Regulation.
3  Deleted. Business secret.
                                                      3

     arrangements were to be taken into account, the ‘two thirds’ condition in Article
     1(2) (which would have been satisfied in any event in relation to Blueslate) would
     not have been satisfied in relation to the UK turnover of the Nomura group as
     defined for the purpose of Article 5(4). It was unnecessary therefore for the present
     case to decide on the precise treatment of turnover arising from investments held by
     [...]1 or similar vehicles.
15. Blueslate plc’s turnover for the year 1996, all of which arose from the activities of
     the four Blueslate subsidiaries, amounted to ECU 2 012 million. Almost all of this
     arose in the UK. A small amount, just over [...]2, arose from telephone bets
     originating from outside the United Kingdom. In accordance with the principles
     outlined in paragraph 46 of the Commission notice on calculation of turnover (94/C
     385/04) such turnover should be treated as arising where the customer is located, in
     this case outside the United Kingdom. However, the relatively small amounts of
     turnover concerned were not sufficient to alter the findings on jurisdiction, and
     therefore the question of precise geographical location of this turnover did not need
     to be pursued further.
16. The operation therefore has a Community dimension. But as neither Nomura
     International nor the Blueslate subsidiaries achieve turnover in any EFTA state
     which is a contracting party to the EEA agreement, the notification does not fall to
     be treated as an EFTA co-operation case.
V         COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
The relevant product market
17. The notifying party contended that there are no overlaps between the activities of
     Nomura International and those of Blueslate. NI is part of the international
     investment banking group headed by The Nomura Securities Co Ltd of Japan.
     Nomura International’s activities focus on general banking activities and investment
     services for the European market, and include corporate advisory services, principal
     finance and trade in various product lines including equities, securities lending,
     fixed income, derivatives, asset trading and origination work. It has made a number
     of acquisitions of UK businesses in recent years, using [...]2 structures similar to
     those described in this Decision. According to the notification these investments
     are all in sectors entirely distinct from the UK betting sector.
18. The Blueslate subsidiaries are active in betting (or “bookmaking”) services which
     comprise on-course and off-course betting and telephone betting.
19. The notification discussed the possibility of overlaps based on broader definitions of
     gambling. One was that Nomura International has invested, using similar [...]2
     warrant arrangements, in pubs in the UK, some of which would have had ‘fruit
     machines’ installed by the landlord, and from which Nomura is in principle entitled
     to a share of the revenue. A second area mentioned was the risk element involved
     in certain derivative products in transactions undertaken by Nomura International.
1  Deleted. Business secret: name of private company.
2  Deleted. Business secret.
                                                      4

     However, in both cases the demand and supply side characteristics in relation to the
     business activities concerned are so different as to lead to the conclusion that they
     cannot be in the same market(s) as those which concern the activities of the
     Blueslate business.
20. In the absence of any competitive overlaps the precise product market definitions
     can be left open.
The relevant geographic market
21. The notifying party provided information describing NI as operating on at least a
     European if not a world-wide basis. As regards Blueslate’s activities, the notifying
     party says that the relevant geographic market is limited to the UK.
22. In the absence of any product market overlap the precise geographic market
     definitions do not need to be addressed and can be left open.
Assessment
23. The information supplied provides no evidence of horizontal overlap, and on this
     basis no competition concerns arise.
Conglomerate aspects
24. According to the notifying party the other UK sectors business sectors invested in
     by Nomura, apart from pubs, are in equipment leasing, rail rolling stock, university
     accommodation, housing association and military housing sector. The only sector
     in which the businesses [...]1 had more than a 25% share was in rail rolling stock
     leasing. On the basis of the information provided, no competition concerns were
     found to arise.
VI       CONCLUSION
25. In view of the above the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
     functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
     Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                        For the Commission,
1  Deleted. Business secret.
                                               5
