                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 23.04.1998
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                    To the notifying parties:
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.1098 - Generali/AMB/Athena
Date of notification :            19.03.1998
Legal Deadline :                  23.04.1998
1.              On 19 March 1998 the Commission received a notification of a proposed
                concentration by which the undertaking Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
                (“Generali”) following a mutual contract between Generali, Allianz and AGF
                concluded on 30 December, 1998 will acquire sole control over AMB
                Aachener und Münchener Beteiligungsgesellschaft (“AMB”), GPA (Vie and
                IARD) and Proxima. These operations are subject to the prior condition that
                Allianz succeeds in taking over the whole of AGF’s shares.
2.              After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
                notified operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No
                4064/89 and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
                Common market or a substantial part of it.
I. THE PARTIES INVOLVED AND THE OPERATIONS
3.              Generali is an Italian insurance company active in life insurance, property and
                casualty insurance and re-insurance in the EEA and world-wide.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

4.         AMB is a holding company and ultimate parent company of the German AM
           Group, owning majority participation in several major insurance companies
           active in property and casualty insurance, life-insurance, health insurance and
           re-insurance, mainly in Germany
5.         GPA (Vie and IARD) and Proxima are French insurance companies,
           subsidiaries of the Athena Group, controlled by AGF. GPA is mainly active in
           life insurance, property and casualty insurance, while Proxima is mainly active
           in welfare benefit insurance and professional retirement insurance.
6.          The take over of AMB and GPA by Generali is part of an Agreement between
            Allianz, AGF and Generali dated 30 December 1997. After the Allianz bid
            has been declared successful, Generali will take over around 60% of AMB’s
            share capital, through the exercise of call and put options provided for in a
            mutual Option agreement between Generali, Allianz, AGF and a number of
            other shareholders of AMB. The options may be exercised until 31 December
            1998. Generali will acquire the remaining shares in AMB by way of a public
            bid. Generali will further purchase from the AGF-owned Athena-Group the
            whole share capital and voting rights of GPA Vie and IARD and all of the
            outstanding capital of Proxima. After the completion of the above-mentioned
            operations, Generali will have sole control over AMB and GPA and Proxima.
            Both operations are concentrations according to Article 3 (1) (b) of the
            Regulation.
II. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.          The parties have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover, calculated in
            accordance with Article 5 (3) (b) of the Regulation in excess of ECU 5,000
            million. Generali, AMB and GPA have each a Community-wide turnover,
            calculated in accordance with article 5 (3) (b) of the Regulation of more than
            ECU 250 million. The parties do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
            aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same member State.
            The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension. It does not
            constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement pursuant to Article
            57 of that Agreement.
III. PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
Relevant Product Markets
8.          Insurance markets can be distinguished into life insurance, non-life insurance
            and reinsurance. Direct life and general insurance can usually be divided into
            as many product markets as there are insurances covering different risks,
            provided there is no substitutability for the consumer (see for example cases
            IV/M.759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance; IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP; IV/M.985 -
            Crédit Suisse/Winterthur). In the present case, the following markets are
            concerned: direct general insurance and direct life insurance in Germany,
            France and Belgium. The final product market definition, however, can be left
            open, because, even on the basis of the narrowest definition, the proposed
            operation does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
            common market or a substantial part of it.
                                            2

Relevant Geographical Markets
9.          In view of some market characteristics like established market structures, the
            need for adequate distribution channels, fiscal constraints and different
            national regulatory supervision, the life and non-life insurance markets have
            been considered to be mainly national. However, insurance markets in
            general, and some market segments in particular, are becoming more and
            more open to intra-community competition, following the free movement of
            services in the Common Market and the harmonisation of national regulatory
            provisions. This tendency is particularly evident with regard to industrial and
            commercial policies.
            A final definition of geographical scope is not needed in the present case,
            given the fact that even the narrowest market definition would not strengthen
            or create a dominant position.
10.        There are no markets affected by the concentrations. The parties have
           overlapping activities in Germany, France and Belgium. In none of these
           countries do the parties have combined market shares of more than
           approximately 11% in any segment. In all the three countries there are
           international competitors active with comparable or higher market shares.
11.         In Germany, the highest combined shares achieved by Generali and German
            AMB-groups is connected to household insurance and amount to
            approximately 10%, while, in life insurance, the combined shares amount to
            9.7%. In both cases, Generali’s share does not exceed 1.5 %.
            In France, where Generali, GPA and Proxima are present together, combined
            market shares, except for accident insurance (circa 11%), group life insurance
            (circa 8%) and personal property fire insurance (approximately 6%), remain
            below 5% in any market segment.
            In Belgium, Generali and AMB are only active in damage to property
            insurance and motor insurance, where combined shares stay below 3%.
IV. CONCLUSION
12.         For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
            operation and to declare it compatible with the Common market. This
            decision is adopted in application of Article 6 (1) (b) of Council Regulation
            (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                       For the Commission,
                                             3
