II.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.    The Credit Suisse Group on its own exceeds the worldwide threshold in accordance
      with Article 5(3), having a turnover in excess of 5,000 M ECU. At EEA level, the
      parties submit that both CSFB and the Business have a turnover exceeding 250 M
      ECU. The EEA turnover of the Business has been calculated based on banking
      income, because, due to the particular nature of the business activities it is not
      possible to identify any “loans and advances” or transactions which could be
      assimilated to them for the geographical allocation. Moreover, the “one-tenth of the
      assets” rule is clearly misleading in this case. The Business has total assets of [...]1.
      If its turnover is calculated according to the method provided by Article 5(3) of the
      ECMR this would be around [...]2, which clearly understates the real economic
      strength of the Business acquired. Based on the banking income method, the EEA
      turnover of the Business acquired amounts to [...]3. CSFB does not generate two
      thirds of its EEA turnover in any Member State. The notified operation therefore
      has Community dimension.
III.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
       A. Relevant product markets
7.    According to past Commission decisions the parties suggest the affected product
      markets in which CSFB and the Business have overlapping activities to be “M&A
      advice”4 and “equity underwriting”5 - as core activities of investment banking - and
      “equity trading”6 as a segment of financial markets.
       B. Relevant geographic markets
8.    The geographical markets of the respective services are also defined by the
      notifying parties according to the abovementioned decisions. The market for M&A
      Advisory services may be defined as national, the market for equity trading is
      predominately national and the market for equity underwriting appears to be global.
       C. Assessment
9.     Market shares for these activities are difficult to assess. Participants in the
       investment banking and other financial services business tend for some areas to
       rely on “league tables”. These are designed to give an indication of the relative
       market position and performance in what is a fragmented and volatile business
1    Deleted. Business secrets. Less than 1000 million ECU.
2    Deleted. Business secrets. Less than 150 million ECU.
3    Deleted. Business secrets. More than 250 million ECU.
4    Case IV/M. 597 - Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G. Warburg, para. 9.
5    Case IV/M. 597 - Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G. Warburg, para. 12.
6    Case IV/M. 597 - Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G. Warburg, para. 15.
                                                        2

      sector. The Commission considered also in previous cases that “league tables”
      adequately reflect the market position of companies involved in this business.7
10.   The combined shares of the parties for equity underwriting and for equity trading
      are low (6% worldwide, respectively 13% in the UK, where the parties achieve the
      highest combined share) and therefore do not raise competition concern. Only in
      M&A advice the parties achieve combined shares in excess of 15% in certain
      countries and in certain years (e.g.: 29.9% in Spain in 1997, 24.7% in the UK in
      1996, 60% in Germany in 1995). However, these shares are incidental and erratic
      in that they fluctuate considerably per country over time due to two main reasons.
11.   First, the absence of an active market for corporate control and the tendency to
      carry out transactions without the use of an external advisor in many parts of the
      EEA territory results in swings in overall market size and the number of
      transactions.
12.   Secondly, in smaller economies there is only a limited number of large acquisitions
      and privatisations every year that international investment banks typically compete
      for. This implies highly concentrated but also highly volatile market positions.
13.   There are a number of other important competitors active in the affected markets,
      namely SBC Warburg, Merryll Lynch, J.P. Morgan, Lazard Houses, Deutsche
      Morgan Grenfell, Dresdner Kleinwort Benson, Salomon Brothers, Goldman Sachs
      and others.
14.   Given the market position of the merged entity, the competitive nature of the
      market concerned and the large number and the strength of the competitors it
      appears that the notified operation does not create or strengthen a dominant
      position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded
      in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
V.    CONCLUSION
15.   For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
      operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
      Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
      Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                             For the Commission,
7   Case IV/M. 642 - Chase Manhattan/Chemical Banking, , para. 13.
                                                   3
