       I.THE PARTIES' ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
3.     The business activities of the undertakings concerned are :
       -    for Hannover Re: all forms of reinsurance, insurance
       -    for the transferred business: reinsurance, direct insurance in the fields of aviation, space
and         war-on-land.
4.     The acquiring party is already present in all the segments of the businesses being acquired.
II.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.     HDI and the business being transferred have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover,
       calculated in accordance with article 5.3(b), in excess of ECU 5,000 million (HDI, ECU
       4,990 million; and the business being transferred, ECU [ 1] million ). Each of them has a
       Community-wide turnover, calculated in accordance with article 5.3(b), in excess of ECU
       250 million (HDI, ECU 3,457 million; and the business being transferred, ECU [ 1]
       million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide
       turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a
       Community dimension. It does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA
       Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
III.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
       A. Relevant product market
6.     The notifying party state that there are relevant product markets for reinsurance, aviation
       and space direct insurance and war-on-land insurance. Reinsurance is a special form of
       insurance, the object of which is to distribute the risk factor between insurers. The
       Commission has established that reinsurance is a market separate from insurance. Further,
       reinsurance could be divided in two segments, life and non life (see decision in case
       IV/M.880 Schweizer Re/Uniorias). Aviation insurance and war-on-land insurance are part
       of the non-life insurance. However, it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant
       product markets aviation and war-on-land insurance because, in all alternative market
       definitions considered, effective competition would not be significantly impeded in the
       EEA or any substantial part of that area.
       B. Relevant geographic market
7.     The notifying party state that the relevant geographic markets are world-wide. The
       Commission has confirmed in the past the world-wide scope of the reinsurance market
       (see, among others, cases IV/M.498 Commercial Union/Groupe Victoire and IV/M.518
       Winterthur/Schweizer Rück). Aviation risk insurance consists of a variety of markets. In
       some cases the indications are that the market is global; in other cases the market is more
       likely to be national. War-on-land insurance is mainly sold by international brokers. The
       customers are large international companies. This indicates the international character of
       the market. However, it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant geographic markets
1    Confidential information, deleted for publication.
                                                        2

      for aviation and war-on-land insurance, because, in all alternative geographic market
      definitions considered, effective competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA
      or any substantial part of that area.
      C. Assessment
8.    The major part of the business concerned by the transaction relates to the market for
      reinsurance. The parties’ combined market share of the world-wide market for reinsurance
      is less than 3 per cent. Since Hannover Re has a very small presence in aviation there will
      be either no overlap or an insignificant overlap on any possible market definition. War-on-
      land insurance is a very small part of the transaction. Market shares on this market are
      insignificant.
9.    In view of the market position of the parties to the concentration, it appears that the
      notified operation will have no impact on competition in the EEA. Consequently, the
      proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of
      which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial
      part of that area.
IV.   ANCILLARY RESTRICTIONS
10.   The Agreement contains a non-competition clause, implying that Skandia shall procure
                                                                                                      2
      that no member of the Skandia group shall, for a period of [            2] from completion, [     ]
      compete with the transferred business. The need to establish reliable relationships with the
      transferred portfolio of clients and the lack of specialization of Hannover Re in some of the
                                                       2
      activities transferred justify the [               ] period. This clause is necessary to give the
      purchaser sufficient time to take over the full value of the business transferred. It can thus
      be regarded as directly related to the concentration and necessary for its implementation.
V.    CONCLUSION
11.   For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
      and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
      Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
      Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                               For the Commission,
2   Confidential information, deleted for publication.
                                                           3
