                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 30.06.1998
                                                                               PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                            MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                        To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject:            Case No IV/M. 1129 - Commercial Union/Berlinische
                     Notification of 28, May 1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Commission
                     Regulation No. 4064/1998
1.      On 28 May 1998 the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration by
        which the undertaking Commercial Union plc (“Commercial Union”) takes over the
        undertaking Berlinische Lebensversicherung AG (“Berlinische”) by acquisition of all the
        shares in the target company. The operation constitutes a concentration in the meaning
        of Article 3 (1) b of the Regulation, leading to sole control of the whole of the target
        company.
I. THE PARTIES INVOLVED AND THE OPERATION
2.      Commercial Union operates a world-wide group of companies in the insurance sector in
        all classes of life- and non-life insurance with the exception of industrial life-insurance, on
        a global scale. The company is further active in the financial services business.
        Berlinische is a German company active in the life-insurance sector which also distributes
        a very small proportion of non-life insurance products supplied by other insurance
        companies. The company’s activities are limited to Germany.
3.      Commercial Union purchases a total of 94.57 % shares in the target company from the
        main shareholders Munich Re and Allianz, which currently hold 64.57 % and 30 %
        respectively. The remaining 5.43 % are widely spread. Operation completed,
        Commercial Union further intends to make a public offer for the remaining 5.43 % of
        shares.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

II. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
4.    Commercial Union and Berlinische have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover,
      calculated in accordance with Article 5 (3) (b) of the Regulation in excess of ECU 5,000
      million (Commercial Union: ECU 13,314 million; Berlinische: ECU 422.8 million). Each
      of them has a Community-wide turnover of more than ECU 250 million (Commercial
      Union: ECU 9,642 million; Berlinische: ECU 422.8 million), but they do not achieve
      more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the
      same member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension. It
      does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement pursuant to Article
      57 of that Agreement.
III. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
A. Relevant product market
5.      The relevant market concerned by the concentration falls within the area of life-
        insurance. According to the practice of the Commission, insurance can be
        subdivided into as many product markets as there are insurances covering different
        kinds of risks. Their characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and there
        is typically no substitutability for the consumer between the different risks insured
        (see for example case No IV/M.812-Allianz/Vereinte or No IV/M.813-
        Allianz/Hermes).
6.      However, for the purposes of the present decision the relevant product market can
        be left open because, even with the narrowest definition of markets, effective
        competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part
        of that area.
B. Relevant geographical market
7.      According to the Commission’s understanding, the life insurance-market in view
        of the established market structures, the need for adequate distribution channels,
        fiscal constraints and differing national systems is still national (see for example
        case No IV/M.1043-B.A.T./Zürich).
8.      However, for the purposes of the present decision the relevant geographic market
        can be left open because, in all alternative geographic market definitions
        considered, effective competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA
        or any substantial part of that area.
IV. ASSESSMENT
9.      The only relevant market where the parties have identified overlapping activities is
        the life-insurance market in Germany. But even this overlap will have only a
        marginal impact on the present market situation, given the fact that Commercial
        Union has only very small activities in the German life business through its recently
        acquired affiliate General Accident (GA, see case No IV/M. 1142).
                                                2

10.  With every alternative calculation, combined market shares after the concentration
     in the overall German life-insurance market would remain below 1% of all
     premiums received. Even if it were necessary further to subdivide life-insurance
     into protection, investment and pension products, added shares will not exceed
     2%. Therefore, there will not be any significant overlap that could create or
     strengthen a dominant position in a German life-insurance market.
11.  In addition, the German life-insurance market is highly fragmented. The five main
     life-insurers are Allianz and its subsidiaries with between 15-16%, Munich Re with
     approximately 11%, AMB with nearly 8% and R+V and Deutscher Herold with
     about 4% of shares each. Berlinische and Commercial Union are ranked 25th
     according to their present amount of market shares. The same picture can be
     drawn regarding the total size of the German life-insurance market which
     according to Datamonitor amounts to 48,862 MECU compared to the combined
     gross premiums written by the parties which amount to 913 MECU (1996). With
     the present take-over, Commercial Union intends to develop a platform from which to
     build its presence in the life insurance business in Germany, the largest European
     insurance market, where it has only a minimal presence so far. The parties still indicate
     that they may increase their ranking by at best one position as a result of the
     concentration.
12.  It follows from the foregoing, in particular from the insignificant nature of
     combined markt shares, that the concentration will not create or strengthen a
     dominant position of the parties in the Common Market or any substantial part of
     it.
V. CONCLUSION
13.  For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the Common market. This decision is
     adopted in application of Article 6 (1) (b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                        For the Commission,
                                              3
