                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 19.5.1998
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                     To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/1101 - Hermes/Sampo/FGB - FCIC
             Notification of 5.2.1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation N 4064/89
1.       On 5.2.1998, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
         concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
         by which the undertakings Hermes Versicherungsbeteiligungs GmbH
         (“Hermes”), Insurance Company of Finland Ltd. (“ICF”) and the Republic of
         Finland, through Finnish Guarantee Board (“FGB”) will establish a joint
         venture, the Finnish Credit Insurance Company (“FCIC”).
2.        The notification was declared incomplete on 17.2.1998 according to Article 4
of        Commission Regulation (EC) No 447/98. The parties provided additional
          information first on 9.3.1998 and, on the second occasion, on 15.4.1998. After
the       receipt of the second letter the notification became effective within the
meaning             of Article 4(2) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 447/98.
         I. THE PARTIES
3.       The Allianz subsidiary Hermes is a German credit insurer active in the
         following business areas: domestic and export credit insurance, capital goods
         insurance, consumer credit insurance, guarantee insurance and fidelity/loss of
         profit insurance.
4.       The Sampo wholly-owned subsidiary ICF is a Finnish credit insurer. ICF is
         engaged both in credit insurance as well as reinsurance.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

5.      FGB is a Finnish state-owned export credit agency. It provides small and
        medium-sized domestic enterprises with export credit insurance and political
        risks coverage.
6.      FCIC will be engaged in credit insurance and, to some extent, reinsurance. The
        parties intend to transfer their respective Finnish credit insurance businesses
        into the joint venture. However, it should be noted that FGB will transfer only
        marketable risks to the joint venture while non-marketable risks will remain in
        FGB. FGB’s engagement in the joint venture may be explained by an effort of
        the Finnish State to adjust its short term credit insurance business to the
        Commission’s recent notice1 which has as its objective to exclude short-term
        credit insurance from public support measures. It is against this background
        that FGB appears to reorganise its marketable short-term credit insurance
        operations within the joint venture.
        II. THE OPERATION
7.      The proposed transaction will result in Hermes, ICF and FGB establishing a joint
        venture, FCIC, within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
        Joint control
8.      The parties will exercise joint control over the joint venture. Each party will hold
        33.3% of the share capital of the joint venture. The Board of Directors will
        comprise 6 persons and each party will nominate 2 members to the Board. The
        appointment of the Board’s chairman rotates annually between the parties. Matters
        which require unanimous shareholder approval include the appointment of the
        Managing Director, the approval of the business plan and the budget.
        Consequently, the joint venture will be jointly controlled by Hermes, ICF and FGB.
        Full function on a lasting basis
9.      The joint venture will have an initial staff of 10 people. All central functions related
        to the credit insurance business, such as risk information gathering, risk evaluation
        and premium calculation will be dealt with by the joint venture. The joint venture
        will also take care of its own marketing and customer service.
10.     The parents will offer the joint venture supporting functions on arm’s length basis.
        Sampo will assist the joint venture in some administrative services such as
        accounting. Furthermore, the joint venture will make use of Sampo’s actuary,
        required by law in Finland, since the services of the actuary are not needed in day-
        to-day business.
11.     Hermes will offer the joint venture its credit information reports and analyses on
        arm’s length basis since, according to the parties, any credit insurer will have only
        limited local resources for gathering credit risk information on the market itself.
        There is, however, no exclusivity requirement imposed on the joint venture to use
1
  Communication of the Commission to the Member States pursuant to Article 93 (1) of the EC Treaty
applying Articles 92 and 93 of the Treaty to short-term export-credit insurance, JO C 281, 17.9.1997,
p.4.
                                                   2

        Hermes’s credit information services but credit information is readily available on
        the open market and the joint venture is free to acquire such information from any
        third party.
12.     For the above reasons the joint venture will be a full function joint venture,
        established on a lasting basis.
        Absence of coordination
13.     The parties say that they will transfer their respective marketable risks businesses in
        the Finnish market to the joint venture and that only FGB will continue to be active
        in covering non-marketable risks. Marketable risks relate to short-term credit risks
        on trade within the Community and with certain countries outside it. As opposed to
        marketable risks which are considered “commercial”, non-marketable risks
        comprise both export credit risks with countries outside the EEA, Australia,
        Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Switzerland and USA as well as all political risks2.
14.     Sampo Group, through its subsidiary Industrial Insurance Company, will remain
        active in the fidelity and computer frauds insurance. Since neither Hermes nor FGB
        are active or intend to start providing insurance cover on this market, no
        cooperation aspects need to be considered. The parties do not, however, exclude
        the possibility that there may be overlaps between the activities of FGB and
        Hermes, on one hand, and the joint venture, on the other hand, on the Finnish
        market. The parties maintain, however, that this overlap, if any, would be de
        minimis. Moreover, the parties say that FGB’s remaining business as a state export
        credit agency for the coverage of non-marketable risks does not constitute
        insurance business as such because it would not be profitable for private credit
        insurers.
15.     To date, it has been relatively safe to assume that underwriting non-marketable
        risks has, to a large extent, been left to state export credit agencies. However, the
        market is evolving and that private insurers are increasingly interested in covering
        also non-marketable risks. There are indications that increasing international
        competition is driving private insurers to extend their risk portfolio to non-
        marketable risks. The investigation carried out by the Commission shows that some
        private credit insurers already underwrite political risks for “good” clients, on a
        case by case basis. According to third parties covering political risks can been seen
        as an asset for the insurer. For instance, underwriting political risks may have
        image advantages, and rating companies also give better rankings for insurers that
        provide cover also for non-marketable risks.
16.     It can be argued that with its expertise and financial resources Hermes, after having
        gained vital access to the evolving Finnish market through the joint venture, could
        move to underwriting non-marketable risks also in the Finnish market and, thus, be
        on the same market with FGB. However, the state export credit agencies have
        traditionally focused on the export activities of small and medium sized companies’
        (SMEs) and take into account additional political considerations, such as
2
  Communication of the Commission to the Member States pursuant to Article 93 (1) of the EC Treaty
applying Articles 92 and 93 of the Treaty to short-term export-credit insurance, JO C 281, 17.9.1997,
p.4.
                                                   3

    stimulating SMEs’ growth and internationalisation efforts and promoting
    employment. In the event Hermes should start covering also political risks in the
    Finnish market, it is questionable whether Hermes would target the same segment
    of companies. Third party comments suggest that more attractive alternative for
    Hermes would rather be insuring large, international companies that favour insurers
    with sufficient capital base and capacity to provide cover for international risks.
17. Finally, the parties say that the joint venture will not, from the outset, be involved
    in insuring non-marketable risks. The parties do submit that the line of business of
    the joint venture may be extended later. While it cannot be excluded that the joint
    venture would underwrite non-marketable risks in the future, at the moment it
    appears hypothetical given inter alia the size of the start-up personnel, the starting
    capital and the gross premium income expectations of the joint venture.
18. A related issue regarding possible coordination between the joint venture and the
    parent companies is the fact that Hermes will reserve the right to underwrite
    marketable risks for international groups including a Finnish company in case the
    joint venture is not able to do this. The parties argue, however, that this will not
    restrict competition since coinsurance between the joint venture and Hermes will
    be carried out on a case by case basis and addresses only a rather singular
    occurrence. According to the parties there exist several conditions which stipulate
    when Hermes can accept to underwrite marketable risks. First of all, Hermes can
    submit such an insurance offer only when requested by such group (“passive
    sale”). Second, Hermes will have to notify the Board of Directors of the joint
    venture and, only in the event that the joint venture is not able or willing to make a
    quotation, Hermes can accept to underwrite the risk.
19. The parties claim that this clause will provide safeguard against a situation where
    the joint venture is unable to provide insurance cover to a particular customer and
    would be in danger of losing the client to a competitor. The parties believe,
    however, that the risk taking capacity of the joint venture will increase over time
    and the clause will lose relevance in the near future.
20. On the basis of the above, it can therefore be concluded that the joint venture will
    not be cooperative.
    Conclusion
21. For the above reasons, the transaction is a concentration within the meaning of
    article 3(2) of the Merger Regulation.
                                            4

         III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
22.      Hermes, ICF and FGB have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover in
         excess of ECU 5,000 million (Hermes ECU 459.440 million, ICF ECU 5.559
         million and FGB ECU 32.569 million). Each of them has a Community-wide
         turnover in excess of ECU 250 million (Hermes ECU 408.629 million, ICF ECU
         5.559 million and FGB ECU 32.500 million), but they do not achieve more than
         two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the
         same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community
         dimension, but does not constitute a cooperation case under the EEA
         Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
         IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
23.      The parties have overlapping activities mainly in credit insurance. According to the
         parties the joint venture will, within the scope of its financial capacity, also practice
         reinsurance. The parties explain, however, that it is customary in the insurance
         business that the insurers of the same insurance sector give reinsurance on a
         reciprocity basis and, accordingly, all market players in credit insurance also offer
         reinsurance of credit insurance risks. Nevertheless, the parties say that reinsurance
         will form only a negligible share of the joint venture’s credit insurance activities
         and, therefore, do not consider reinsurance as a relevant product market.
         1. Relevant product market
24.      According to the parties the relevant product market is thecredit insurance market.
         The parties divide credit insurance into three distinct classes, 14, 15 and 16, and
         sub-divide the classes as follows: Class 14 includes domestic and export credit
         insurance, consumer credit insurance and capital goods credit insurance; class 15
         comprises guarantee insurance; and class 16 relates to fidelity/loss of profit and
         business interruption insurance3. According to the parties the relevant segment in
         this case comprises only class 14 risks as defined above, because the joint venture
         will be active only on this segment.
25.      The Commission has considered the credit insurance market in three previous
         decisions. Both in IV.M.812 - Allianz/Vereinte and IV.M.813 - Allianz/Hermes the
         Commission took a demand-side position that life and non-life insurance could be
         segmented into as many product markets as there are types of different risks.
         Subsequently, in IV.M.813 - Allianz/Hermes the Commission identified the
         following segments of credit insurance: “delcredere” insurance (including domestic
         and export credit insurance and capital goods insurance); consumer credit
         insurance; guarantee insurance; and fidelity insurance. Credit insurance in general
         offers protection for suppliers of goods and services against insolvency of a debtor
         or extended late payments whereas fidelity insurance and computer fraud insurance
         cover internal risks deriving from illicit actions committed by employees of the
         insured.
3
  This subdivision is based on First Council Directive of 24 July 1973 on the co-ordination of laws,
Regulations and administrative provisions relating to the taking-up and pursuit of the business of
direct insurance other than life insurance, JO L 228, 16.8.1973, p. 3.
                                                   5

26. In its decision IV/M.1082 - Allianz/AGF the Commission divided the “delcredere”
    insurance policies into domestic credit insurance, export credit and capital goods
    insurance. The Commission concluded that both domestic and export credit
    insurance protect the policy holder against the insolvency of the client, and the only
    difference between the two different types of insurance is the location of the risk
    insured. Export credit insurance can be further divided according to the kind of risk
    covered (see above section II, point 13). Capital goods insurance covers insolvency
    risks deriving from the purchase of installations and factories in the home market
    and abroad.
27. In IV.M.813 - Allianz/Hermes the Commission concluded that, from the supply-
    side perspective, the credit insurance companies could cover all types of risks and,
    consequently, defined one credit insurance market incorporating all the above
    mentioned risks. However, in IV/M.1082 - Allianz/AGF the Commission examined
    the “delcredere” market as one separate product market due to its special
    characteristics, such as the requirement of extensive knowledge of the markets,
    investments and human resources.
28. In the present case the parties argue that bank guarantees should be considered
    credit insurance because, especially on the Finnish market, the majority of the
    guarantees are given out by banks rather than insurers. In addition, the parties argue
    that factoring may increasingly be substituted for class 14 credit insurance as
    defined above and is a potential competitor for credit insurance.
29. In IV.M.813 - Allianz/Hermes the Commission investigated whether services
    offered by banks should be regarded as substitutes for credit insurance. The
    Commission held that, although some products offered by banks are beginning to
    enter the market as potential competitors to credit insurance, due to their particular
    characteristics and prices these products are not yet sufficiently developed to
    substitute credit insurance products as such but are supplementary in nature. An
    investigation carried out by the Commission in the present case also confirms that
    bank guarantees are not, in general, considered as direct substitutes to credit
    insurance.
30. However, for the purposes of this decision it is not necessary to exactly define the
    market because, in all alternative market definitions considered, effective
    competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part
    of that area.
    2. Relevant geographic market
31. According to the parties the relevant geographic market is Finland. The parties base
    their argument on two previous decisions: In IV.M.813 - Allianz/Hermes the
    Commission concluded, inter alia, that the market entry takes place mainly through
    national subsidiaries and assumed that the relevant geographic market in that
    particular case was national. Also in IV.M.812 - Allianz/Vereinte the Commission
    concluded that the market was national.
32. On the other hand, in both IV.M.812 - Allianz/Vereinte and IV.M.813 -
    Allianz/Hermes the Commission recognised the fact that there are indications of the
    internationalisation of the credit insurance market. However, in IV.M.812 -
                                          6

    Allianz/Vereinte the Commission found that, despite the fact that the market is
    opening up especially for industrial customers, the market structure, distribution,
    customer preferences and national legislation dictate that the market is national.
33. In IV/M.1082 - Allianz/AGF the Commission recognised the fact that markets are
    becoming increasingly European in scope because of the liberalisation process in
    the European insurance markets, the world-wide re-insurance structures and the
    growing internationalisation of the business. The Commission noted that especially
    multinational corporates require a wider geographical scope in terms of servicing
    their group-wide operations from a single source. On the other hand, the
    Commission took notice also of the fact that “delcredere” market has a national
    dimension, too. This can be seen in the fact that small and medium sized
    companies usually seek credit insurance with domestic companies. Policies are
    mainly contracted on a local basis because of the need of information on the
    business of the insured, the financial situation of the customers and the local
    economic structures. The Commission concluded that there are elements to support
    both international and national geographic market definition, but for the purposes
    of the decision the definition was left open.
34. There are clear indications in the present case that the market is evolving and there
    is an increasing number of foreign insurers who offer insurance policies to Finnish
    policy holders, also cross-border. However, the fact that Hermes is seeking a local
    alliance in the Finnish market is in line with the Commission’s previous findings
    and indicates that market entry may still require operating together with a local
    player.
35. However, for the purposes of this decision, the relevant geographic market can be
    left open because, in all alternative geographic market definitions considered,
    effective competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any
    substantial part of that area.
    V. ASSESSMENT
    A. Impact of the operation at the European level
36. Hermes has activities in all European countries, except Greece. ICF has activities
    only in Finland. FGB covers marketable risks in Finland and non-marketable risks
    in Finland but, to a minor extent, also in Germany and Sweden. However, as the
    joint venture will not underwrite non-marketable risks, FGB’s activities in
    Germany and Sweden do not affect the overall market shares on these markets.
    Following this, it may be concluded that the operation will not strengthen or create
    a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
    significantly impeded on these markets.
    B. Impact of the operation at the national level
37. As stated above, all three notifying parties have overlapping activities in Finland.
    According to the parties a particular feature in the Finnish credit insurance
    business is the role of captive insurers, who play an important role in the
    Finnish credit insurance market. Captive insurers can be divided into two
    groups: (i) normal captives and (ii) bank captives. Normal captives, the parties
                                           7

        say, refer to insurance companies that form part of a large industrial group and
        exclusively cover risks borne by members of this group. On the other hand
        banks, according to the parties, can balance their credit risk through taking out
        an insurance and thus reduce their capitalisation requirements.
38.     The parties identify three normal captive insurers in Finland: Pankavara,which
        is controlled by Enso Group; Garantia, which is controlled by 9 pension funds;
        and Dairies’ Mutual, which is owned by some 60 dairies’ cooperatives. The
        only bank captive is Mutual Insurance Company of Cooperative Banks, which
        is owned by about 250 cooperative banks.
39.     According to the parties only one insurer, Pankavara, has been created for
        captive use in a strict sense. The parties base this argument on the fact that
        Pankavara is under the direct control of another company (Enso Group), while
        the other three companies are not. The parties argue, therefore, that the
        premium income of Pankavara should not be taken into account when
        calculating market shares while the premium income of the other three captives
        should be included in such calculations.
40.     The investigation carried out by the Commission shows that Pankavara
        provides insurance cover only to the Enso Group and has no possibilities to
        underwrite risks to third parties. Accordingly, Dairies’ Mutual provides credit
        insurance only to Valio and it’s shareholders, cooperative dairies, and Garantia
        provides guarantee insurance only to pension related investors. Mutual
        Insurance Company of Cooperative Banks underwrites risks only to its member
        banks.
41.     Captive production should, according to the normal economic practice, be
        excluded from the market share calculations. However, the investigation
        suggests that while the captive insurers operating in the Finnish credit
        insurance market are themselves restricted as to the choice of their customers,
        their customers appear to be somewhat free to seek insurance coverage on the
        open market. A tentative conclusion may therefore be drawn that, from the
        demand side, both captive and non-captive insurers compete, at least to some
        extent, for the same customers. Given this, it appears that captive insurers
        operate, at least partly, on the same market as non-captive insurers.
42.     On the basis of the above, market shares will be examined both including and
        excluding the captive insurers and the bank guarantees in the following:
        a) Class 14 insurance, including captives
43.     When class 14 credit insurance is considered, captive insurers hold, according
        to the parties, an estimated [..]4 (bank captives [..]5 + Pankavara [..]6) of the
        total of the market in Finland. ICF is the second largest credit insurer with a
        [..]7 stake of the market, Pohjola holds [..]8 and FGB [..]9 of the market. Other
4
  Confidential information, between 70 - 80%
5
  Confidential information, between 70 - 80%
6
  Confidential information, between 1 - 5%
7
  Confidential information, between 5 - 10%
8
  Confidential information, between 1 - 5%
                                              8

        foreign companies have a combined market share of [..]10 whereas Hermes’s
        share of the total market is less than [..]11. When taking all the captive insurers
        into account, the combined market share of the parties is less than [..]12. The
        exclusion of Pankavara would not have any significant impact on the market
        shares.
        b) Class 14 insurance, excluding captives
44.     In the event that all captive insurers would be excluded from the market share
        calculations, the parties’ combined market share would rise to [..]13. The next
        largest credit insurer would be Pohjola with [..]14 of the market. Other Finnish
        insurers would have a combined share of [..]15 and the foreign companies
        jointly [..]16.
        c) Class 14-16 insurance, including captives
45.     When considering a wider product market definition, that is, classes 14-16,
        financial institutions offering bank guarantees have, according to the parties,
        [..]17 of the market. Captive insurers hold [..]18 of the market (bank captives
        [..]19 + Garantia [..]20 + Pankavara [..]21), Pohjola, foreign insurers and others
        respectively [..]22, and FGB [..]23. The combined market share of the joint
        venture would, according to this scenario, be less than [..]24.
        d) Class 14-16 insurance, excluding captives
46.     If all captive insurers were to be excluded, financial institutions offering bank
        guarantees would hold [..]25 of the whole of the market. Pohjola would have a [..]26
        stake, other Finnish insurers would have jointly [..]27 and the foreign insurers [..]28
        of the market. The combined market share of the joint venture would be less
        than [..]29.
        e) Class 14-16 insurance, excluding captives and bank guarantees
9
  Confidential information, between 1 - 5%
10
   Confidential information, between 5 - 10%
11
   Confidential information, < 5%
12
   Confidential information, between 10 - 15%
13
   Confidential information, between 40 - 50%
14
   Confidential information, between 10 - 20%
15
   Confidential information, < 5%
16
   Confidential information, between 30 - 40%
17
   Confidential information, between 50 - 60%
18
   Confidential information, between 20 - 30%
19
   Confidential information, between 20 - 30%
20
   Confidential information, between 5 - 10%
21
   Confidential information, between 1 - 5%
22
   Confidential information, < 5%
23
   Confidential information, < 5%
24
   Confidential information, between 1 - 5%
25
   Confidential information, between 80 - 90%
26
   Confidential information, between 1 - 5%
27
   Confidential information, between 1 - 5%
28
   Confidential information, between 1 - 5%
29
   Confidential information, between 5 - 10%
                                              9

47.     As discussed above, the Commission has tentatively suggested that services
        offered by bank, such as bank guarantees, should be considered supplementary
        products to credit insurance rather than substitutes. If, therefore, also bank
        guarantees were to be excluded, the joint venture’s market share would rise from
        approximately [..]30 to [..]31.
        C. Conclusion
48.     Based on the above, it can be observed that the joint venture may reach
        relatively high market shares if the captive insurers and bank guarantees were
        to be excluded from the calculations. However, market shares alone do not
        necessarily indicate dominance but there are other considerations to be taken
        into account.
49.     In particular, the liberalisation of the insurance market in the European Union
        has rendered the previously national markets more open to intra-community
        competition and set about a considerable amount of reorganisation and
        regrouping among the European insurers. The changes taking place in the
        European market can be seen clearly also in the Finnish credit insurance
        market where the present operation reflects the general reorganising in Europe.
        It is therefore important to consider the market shares in the context of a
        rapidly changing market. Following this, while the joint venture could reach a
        market share up to [..]32 it should be noted, first of all, that at the same time the
        joint venture’s most important competitor Pohjola has teamed up with the
        German insurer Gerling Speziale Kreditversicherung-AG (“Gerling”), which is
        likely to strengthen Pohjola's ability to compete.
50.     The changes prompted by the opening of the Finnish market can be seen
        particularly in that the activity of foreign credit insurers has increased relatively
        fast during the past few years: between 1994-1997 foreign credit insurers have
        increased their market share from 1-2% to 20-30%, depending on the relevant
        market. Several foreign credit insurers have also recently announced plans to
        underwrite credit insurance business in Finland (e.g. BG Garanti, Zuricher
        Versicherung).
51.     This considerable increase in the number of foreign credit insurers witnesses
        reasonable possibilities to enter the Finnish market. The foreign credit
        insurance companies’ entry to the Finnish credit insurance market has
        happened both by establishing branch offices but also by brokering which, in
        particular, appears to be a viable medium for market entry. The Commission
        noted in its decision IV.M.759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance that the
        existence of broker channels of distribution remove some of the cost and
        difficulty of establishing independent channels of distribution. The same
        advantages apply also to the entry to the Finnish market, and it may be noted
        that Finnish legislation does not e.g. require a license for cross-border
        insurance that takes place through a broker.
30
   Confidential information, between 5 - 10%
31
   Confidential information, between 30 - 40%
32
   Confidential information, between 40 - 50%
                                              10

52. The investigation suggests that the Finnish credit insurance market is lucrative
    for especially large European credit insurers because of the fact that there is
    demand in Finland for credit insurance with sufficient capital base. However,
    the local credit insurance companies tend to operate on a smaller scale and are
    not frequently able to meet the large, export driven industry’s insurance
    demands. Third party comments confirm the assertion that the smaller Finnish
    credit insurance companies need to regroup in order to present a competitive
    offer to these large customers.
53. The rapid increase in the number of foreign credit insurers also indicates that
    the market is relatively immature and that there is basis for growth. Compared
    to the other European countries the market penetration in Finland is low. The
    parties estimate that, at present, only about 7% of domestic receivables and
    23% of export risks are insured which, according to the parties, is due to the
    fact that only large Finnish exporters use credit insurance while SMEs are not
    accustomed to covering these risk to the same extent. Both the notifying parties
    and third parties expect the market to grow rapidly in the next few years.
54. Another important notion as regards the development of credit insurance markets
    in general is the fact that the boundaries between different insurance products and
    product groups appear to be moving. As already discussed above, private insurers
    have started moving to the non-marketable risk sector which used to be the
    exclusivity of the state export credit agencies. Another example is the products and
    services offered by banks which may be potential substitutes to some credit
    insurance products in the near future. The delimitations of different groups of credit
    insurance may therefore be outdated within the near future and the market positions
    of the players different.
55. Based on the above, the market share of the joint venture as calculated in any
    alternative market definitions does not seem to be indicative of a dominant
    position, given the presence of another strong player on the market, the evidence of
    increasing competition from foreign credit insurers, the present low penetration of
    the market and potential new substituting products.
    VI. CONCLUSION
56. For the above reasons the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
    functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
    Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 4064/89.
                                               For the Commission
                                           11
