                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 24.06.1998
                                                                                PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                             MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                           ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                         To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M. 1172 FORTIS AG/GENERALE BANK
              Notification of 18 May 1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation N/4064/89.
1.     On 18 May 1998, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by which Fortis AG
       S.A/N.V. and Fortis Amev N.V. (the Fortis group) acquires control of the whole of
       Generale Bank N.V Générale de Banque S.A (G-Bank) by way of purchase of shares from
       the Group Generale Maatschappij van Belgie N.V. - Société Générale de Belgique S.A.
       (SGB). In a second stage Fortis AG S.A. will launch a public bid on the rest of G-Bank
       shares.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
       raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE OPERATION AND THE PARTIES
3.     Fortis is a Belgian-Dutch insurance and banking group. Fortis was formed by the
       merger between Compagnie Financière et de Réasssurance du Groupe AG (now called
       Fortis AG) and N.V. AMEV (now called Fortis AMEV) in 1990 (see Case IV/M.018
       AG/AMEV - 21.11.1990). The main activity of Fortis is insurance and banking. Its
       operations are principally based in Belgium and the Netherlands, with a presence in
       other Member States. G-Bank is the largest Belgian bank, it operates mainly in
       Belgium and the Netherlands and to a lesser extent in other Member states and outside
       the European Union. The range of its activities includes also life and non-life insurance.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

4.   On May 17, 1998 the Boards of Directors of Fortis AG and SGB approved an
     agreement pursuant to which SGB unconditionally and irrevocably committed itself to
     make a contribution in kind into the capital of Fortis AG of all G-Bank shares on its
     possession. In addition, Mutuelle Solvay, Union Financière Boël also committed to
     make a contribution, together with the 29.7% of SGB; these contributions represent a
     32.8% of G-Bank’s total share capital. This will confer control to Fortis. In a second
     stage, Fortis AG will launch a public take-over bid for all the G-Bank shares not
     already in its possession in the form of a public offer of exchange of shares.
5.   The integration of G-Bank and Fortis will result in the creation of an internationally
     oriented banking group by combining the assets of G-Bank group with those of
     ASLK-CGER Bank in Belgium (itself a result of the earlier integration of ASLK-
     CGER Bank, NMKN-SNCI and Metropolitan Bank), as well as those of MeesPierson
     and VSB Bank in the Netherlands.
6.   The exchange of shares described above will create control by SGB (SGB has
     presently around 20% of Fortis AG), within the meaning of the Merger Regulation, of
     the Belgian side of Fortis (Fortis AG), given the participation of other shareholders in
     Fortis AG General meeting. This triggers a second notification (Case No.IV/M.1194 -
     SGB/FORTIS AG).
II.   COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.   The Fortis group and G-Bank have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover in
     excess of ECU 5,000 million (Fortis, ECU 17,561.4 million; and G-Bank, ECU
     9,733.5 million ). Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of ECU 250
     million (Fortis, ECU 14,464.1 million; and G-Bank, ECU 9,260.1 million), but they
     do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover
     within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a
     Community dimension. It does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA
     Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
III. CONCENTRATION
8.   The companies which make up Fortis are all direct or indirect subsidiaries of Fortis AG
     and Fortis Amev, each currently holding, directly or indirectly, 50% of the shares.
     Both parent companies hold equal voting rights in the group’s top holding companies.
     As a result of the acquisition of G-Bank shares by Fortis AG, the participating interest
     of Fortis AG in the new Fortis group will exceed that of Fortis AMEV. However, the
     long-standing equilibrium between the Belgian and Dutch parents of the Fortis group
     will be maintained through appropriate arrangements which will ensure that Fortis AG
     and Fortis AMEV will have equal voting rights in all management and decision-making
     bodies of the group’s top holdings (Heads of Agreement 1998 dated 17th May 1998).
9.   The completion of the concentration will be followed by a legal restructuring of the
     Fortis group with the aim of regrouping the Fortis operating companies on a functional
     rather than on a geographical basis. All banking assets world-wide will be combined to
     build a single Fortis banking group around Generale Bank, which will be the parent of
     the new Fortis banking group. All insurance assets world-wide, except for ASLK-
     CGER Insurance (which will remain a subsidiary of ASLK-CGER Bank), will be
                                               2

      aggregated under a newly created Dutch holding company. Unity of management of
      the two functional sub-groups will be ensured and this restructuring will not constitute
      concentrations within the meaning of Article 3 of the Merger Regulation.
10. As stated above Fortis will have sole control over G-Bank at the completion of the
      transaction. The operation therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of
      article 3(1)b of the Council Regulation 4064/89, of 21 December 1989.
IV.     COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
        A. Relevant product market(s)
        BANKING
11. The Commission has consistently held that the services typically supplied by a universal
      bank may be divided into the following areas: retail banking, corporate banking and
      financial market services.1 In particular, the distinction between retail and corporate
      banking is relevant for the purposes of assessing market conditions (see Case M.1029
      MERITA/NORDBANKEN).2
12. By retail banking is meant banking services to households which consist, for example,
      of deposits, lending, credit cards and funds and other forms of asset management. By
      corporate banking is meant banking services to corporate clients which consist, for
      example, of deposits, lending, international payments, letters of credit and advice
      concerning mergers and acquisitions. With respect to financial markets the following
      activities may constitute distinct service markets: trading in equities, bonds, and
      derivatives, foreign exchange and money markets (i.e. treasury bills and commercial
      paper from banks and companies).
13. For the purpose of the present case it is, however, not necessary to define conclusively
      the relevant product markets because, even on the narrowest market definition, the
      concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which
      effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part
      of that area.
       INSURANCE
14. In the insurance sector a distinction is made between both life and non-life insurance
      and reinsurance. Reinsurance is a separate market because of its purpose of spreading
      risks between insurers. Life and non-life insurance can be divided into as many product
      markets as there are different kinds of risks covered. Their characteristics, premiums
      and purposes are distinct and there is typically no substitutability for the consumer
      between the different risks insured (see case IV/M. 812 - Allianz/Vereinte or case
      IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP). For the purpose of the present case it is, however, not necessary
1 See, for example, Case IV/M.342 - Fortis/CGER and Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt.
2 Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt.
                                                  3

      to define conclusively the relevant product markets as, even on the narrowest market
      definition, the concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position.
       B. Relevant geographic markets
BANKING
15. The notifying party states that the relevant geographic markets are either national or
      international in scope depending on the specific banking sector. Retail banking and
      corporate banking are in most cases considered to be national in scope. The situation
      may, however, change in the future as a result of single currency and of new
      technologies. Investment banking and the financial markets have normally an
      international dimension.
16. The Commission has stated in previous cases3 that with regard to retail banking the
      relevant geographic market is to be considered national in scope due to the competitive
      conditions which in individual Member States are still different despite the increasing
      trend towards internationalisation, and due also to the importance of a network of
      branches. There are, however, indications that the present situation may change in the
      longer term with the introduction of the single currency and new technologies, e.g.
      internet and telephone banking.
17. With regard to corporate banking the Commission has generally taken the view that
      certain product segments will continue to be required and supplied at national level.4
      However, some sectors of corporate banking seem to have a more international
      dimension. The Commission’s investigation shows that the relevant geographic market
      appears to be national for small and medium-sized corporate clients and international
      for large corporate clients. Furthermore, for financial markets the relevant geographic
      market appears to be international in scope.
18. However, whether the markets are considered to be national or international need not
      be finally decided in the present case because, on the basis of the assessment set out
      below, even on the narrowest market definition, the concentration does not create or
      strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
      significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
INSURANCE
19. The markets for life and non-life insurance are national as a result of national
      distribution channels, the established market structures, fiscal constraints and differing
      regulatory systems (see case M. 759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance). The markets for
      reinsurance are world wide in view of the need to pool risks on an international basis
      and the conduct of reinsurance business (see case M. 862 - Axa/UAP).
3 For example, Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt and Case IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
4 See, for example, Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt.
                                                   4

       C. Assessment
20. The creation of an integrated European area for financial services and the introduction
      of the euro has sharply accelerated the ongoing consolidation process within the
      European financial sector. The Belgian banking sector has seen major concentrations
      over the last months (take-over of BBL by the Dutch ING group, Case No M.1.061
      ING/BBL, and the merger of the Flemish institutions Kredietbank, CERA, ABB and
      Fidelitas to form a major integrated financial services provider). These concentrations
      are also prompted by the fact that most Belgian banks are significantly smaller in size
      than their foreign counterparts.
      BANKING
21. Strong market overlaps exists only in Belgium where market shares in different
      segments of banking activity remain always below 35%. There will remain strong
      competitors in Belgium (CCB, BBL/ING, Kredietbank, Bacob). Furthermore, the
      European Monetary Union will bring along increasing competition and wider markets.
      The new entity will hold in Belgium the following position compared with the total of
      the Belgian banking system: [ … ]5 of its assets, [ … ]6 of its deposits and [… ]7 of its
      credits. However Belgium will remain a competitive market. Shares for the new entity
      main competitors’ and for the same aggregates are respectively: BBL 12.1%, 12.8%
      and 14.4%. KB/CERA 15.5%, 17.4% and 15.9%, CCB 9.8%, 14.5% and 14.8%.
      Bacob 5.5%, 5.6% and 5% (source Banque Nationale de Belgique).
22. The Commission has examined the network-effect of the merger in all the Belgian
      provinces and regions. The new entity will have from [… ]8 of the outlets in Western
      Flanders up to [… ] 9 of the outlets in Hainaut and Namur /Walloon Brabant. Even if
      the new entity will have the strongest market network in Belgium, this will not confer
      on it a dominant position since consumers will have sufficient competitors’ banking
      outlets at hand. Furthermore, the existence of cash-dispensers, electronic banking and
      telephone banking minimise the effect of any strong position in this respect.
23. In the Netherlands the new entity will hold 5.4% of the total banking assets (Rabobank
      25% ING 18% and ABN-AMRO 22%). 7% of the deposits (Rabobank 26% ING 20%
      and ABN-AMRO 22%). 5.8% of the total credits (Rabobank 28%, ING 20% and
      ABN-AMRO 21%) (source De Nederlandsche Bank). As a consequence the operation
      will not create a dominant position on retail banking in Belgium and the Netherlands
24. For corporate banking, the new entity will hold a strong position on corporate loans
      [… ]10 and current accounts with corporate clients [… ] 11. The market for corporate
5 Deleted business secret, between 20 and 25%.
6 Deleted business secret, between 28 and 33%.
7 Deleted business secret, between 26 and 33%.
8 Deleted business secret, between 24 and 28%.
9 Deleted business secret, between 35 and 39%.
10 Deleted business secret, between 34 and 38%.
                                                5

      clients is very competitive and market shares could be easily eroded by other Belgian
      and European strong competitors if the new entity would depart from conditions taken
      as normal by the market. In financial markets the new entity will be small compared
      with other European, American and Japanese players.
         INSURANCE
25. G-Bank is a small player in non-life insurance where overlaps are very limited. G-
      Bank’s contribution to the life insurance activity will bring Fortis up to [… ] 12 market
      share (life individual) and [… ]13 (life group). There will remain strong insurers such as
      Groupe Royale Belge/AXA (10.3% and 12.5%), ABB (4%), Assubel/AGF (4.2% and
      5.5%) and SMAP 32.7% in life-group).
V.       CONCLUSION
For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) N°
4064/89.
                                                           For the Commission,
11 Deleted business secret, between 29 and 33%.
12 Deleted business secret, between 30 and 34%.
13 Deleted business secret, between 20 and 24%.
                                                  6
