                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 06.05.1998
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                     To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M.1142 - Commercial Union / General Accident
             Notification of 27.03.1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation N
             4064/89
1.     On 27 March 1998, the Commission received notification of a proposed
       concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
       between Commercial Union plc (“CU”) and General Accident plc (“GA”) within
       the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Regulation.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
       notified operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
       and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market
       and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.        THE PARTIES
3.     CU and GA are companies based in the United Kingdom, the principal activities
       of which are the transaction of all classes of insurance and life-insurance, other
       than industrial life, in the United Kingdom, continental Europe, North America,
       Australia and other parts of the world. The undertakings also provide financial
       services related to their core business of insurance.
II.       CONCENTRATION
4.     Commercial Union will acquire, by means of a public bid, the entire issued
       ordinary share capital of General Accident. This operation constitutes a
       concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
       Following the concentration, Commercial Union will be renamed CGU plc.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

III.   COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.   The combined aggregate world-wide gross premium income of the undertakings
     concerned exceeded 5,000 million ECU in 1997 (CU: 13,314 million ECU; GA:
     9,721 million ECU). The aggregate Community-wide gross premium income of
     each the undertakings was more than 250 million ECU (CU: 9,642 million ECU;
     GA: 5,890 million ECU).
6.   The undertakings concerned do not generate more than two-thirds of their
     aggregated Community-wide gross premium income within one and the same
     Member State. Hence, the concentration has a Community dimension.
IV.    COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
a)     Relevant product markets
7.   In past decisions the Commission has distinguished between life insurance,
     general insurance and reinsurance. Reinsurance constitutes a separate market
     because of its purpose of spreading risk between insurers. It is more specialised
     and conducted between insurers and reinsurers on an international basis because
     of the need to pool risks. The regulatory framework is also less stringent.
8.   On the demand side, life and non-life insurance can be divided into as many
     product markets as there are insurances covering different kinds of risk. Their
     characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and there is typically no
     substitutability for the consumer between the different risks insured (see for
     example case IV/M.862 - AXA/UAP). Nevertheless, even on the basis of the
     narrowest definition, the operation does not raise serious doubts as to its
     compatibility with the common market (see below).
b)     Geographical reference markets
9.   Insurance markets are becoming more open to intra-community competition,
     particularly for industrial and commercial policies, as a result of measures to
     facilitate cross-border selling. Nevertheless, as far as life and non-life insurance
     are concerned geographical reference markets are at present mainly national in
     view of the established market structures, the need for adequate distribution
     channels, fiscal constraints in some cases and differing national systems of
     regulatory supervision (see case IV/M.759 - Sun Alliance / Royal Insurance).
     However, given the need to pool risks on an international basis and the conduct
     of reinsurance business on a world-wide basis, the geographical reference market
     for reinsurance is global (see case IV/M.862 - AXA/UAP).
c)     Competitive assessment
10. There are no affected markets outside the UK. In the UK there are three affected
     markets, namely travel insurance, commercial property insurance, and fidelity
                                            2

    guarantee insurance, where the merged entity’s shares will be [...]1, [...]2 and [...]3
    respectively.
11. In travel and commercial property insurance the merged entity will be marginally,
    UK market leader. However, there are strong competitors in these markets such
    as Royal Sun Alliance, Zurich / Eagle Star, Legal and General, Guardian, and so
    on. In the travel insurance market, where insurance is normally sold as a package
    (accident, luggage, cancellation, medical expenses, etc.), Home and Overseas Ltd
    and Bishopsgate Ltd. have [...]4 and [...]5 market shares respectively. A
    Commission survey of the parties’ principal competitors and customers has
    revealed that the transaction does not give rise to serious competition concerns.
12. Moreover, there would seem to be some degree of supply-side substitutability in
    the insurance sector. Insurance companies with expertise in one or more product
    lines are able normally to reapply those skills to enter other product areas. This
    ability is underpinned by the fact that insurance products require a common set of
    skills in terms of, inter alia, risk assessment, administration (including IT
    systems) and claims management.
13. Again, the Non-Life Directive, which came into force on 1 July 1994, completed
    the legislative structure for the dismantling of the prudential and regulatory
    barriers to cross-border trade in the Non-Life sector. There is increasing evidence
    of greater cross-border trade both by acquisition and direct representation. Within
    the Community as a whole, the UK may be regarded as a more open market.
14. Furthermore, distribution networks are undergoing a significant degree of change
    in the form of direct telephone selling by underwriters, and marketing by banks
    and even supermarkets.
    In view of the above, the current operation will not create or strengthen a
    dominant position.
V.     CONCLUSION
15. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                      For the Commission,
1  Deleted for publication, between 15% and 30%
2  Deleted for publication, between 15% and 30%
3  Deleted for publication, between 15% and 30%
4  Deleted for publication, between 15% and 25%
5  Deleted for publication, between 10% and 20%
                                               3
