                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 04.03.1998
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                     to the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M.1106 Bayerische Vereinsbank/FGH Bank
             Notification of 04.02.98 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation N 4064/89
1.     On 04.02.1998, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
       concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by
       which the German undertaking Bayerische Vereinsbank AG (“Vereinsbank”)
       acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control
       of Dutch FGH Bank N.V. (“FGH”) by purchase of 99.75% of the issued share
       capital.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
       notified operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
       and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market
       and with the EEA Agreement.
I.      THE PARTIES' ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
3.     The business activities of the undertakings concerned are the following:
4.     Vereinsbank is a commercial bank established in Germany providing a broad
       range of banking products and services in the areas of retail banking, commercial
       banking and financial markets. The Vereinsbank is predominantly active in
       Germany.
5.     FGH is a specialised commercial real estate bank, providing real estate credit
       facilities and related activities. FGH focuses on the wholesale segment of the
       Dutch real estate market (i.e. commercial real estate) and is a niche player with
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

      respect to residential mortgages. In addition FGH provides a number of related
      services. FGH is almost exclusively active in the Netherlands.
II.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.    The undertakings Vereinsbank and FGH have a combined aggregate world-wide
      turnover in excess of ECU 5,000 million ( 1 ). Each of them has a Community-
      wide turnover in excess of ECU 250 million ( 2 ), but they do not achieve more
      than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the
      same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community
      dimension, but does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement,
      pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
III.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
       A. Relevant product and geographic markets
7.    The notifying party states that the activities of FGH only relate to real estate
      financing. This is the only segment in which both FGH and Vereinsbank might
      have overlapping activities. The notifying party furthermore states that the
      relevant geographic market is national.
8.    However, it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant product and
      geographic markets because, in all alternative market definitions considered,
      effective competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any
      substantial part of that area.
       B. Assessment
9.    As the activities of FGH only relate to real estate financing, this is the only
      market segment in which both FGH and Vereinsbank have overlapping activities.
      The market shares of both banks in the Netherlands in the area of real estate
      financing do not exceed 3%. The same is true if one were to subdivide this area
      into residential and commercial retail financing.
10. In Germany Vereinsbank has a slightly higher market share in the area, of real
      estate financing, i.e. 5.55% (9.2% for commercial, 4.47 residential), to which
      FGH would however contribute only with a share of 3 per thousand. This would
      thus create only a de minimis overlap and no affected market either.
11. This assessment would not be altered if one were to add the market shares of the
      Bayerische Hypotheken-und Wechselbank AG (“Hypo-Bank”). Vereinsbank
      intends to merge with Hypo-Bank in the third quarter of 1998 and already owns
      45% of Hypo-Bank’s shares. The Bundeskartellamt has cleared the merger in
      January 1998. Hypo-Bank’s market shares in the Netherlands do not exceed a
      third of a percent under any of the constellations examined here. Its market shares
      in Germany are 5.31% in the real estate financing sector and 4.76% and 7.2% in
      the residential and commercial real estate financing respectively.
1    Deleted for publication.
2    Deleted for publication.
                                             2

12. In view of the market position of the parties to the concentration, it appears that
    the proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a
    result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA
    or any substantial part of that area.
IV.  ANCILLARY RESTRICTIONS
13. The parties have notified a non-solicitation clause and a non-competition clause
    binding the seller Aegon N.V. The application of the clauses is limited to a period
    of three years and covers commercial real estate financing in the Netherlands
    only. These clauses are in line with the principles set out in the Commission
    notice regarding restrictions ancillary to concentrations (OJ C203, 14.08.1990,
    p.5) and in particular its points III.A.1. - 3.
V.   CONCLUSION
14. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                    For the Commission,
                                             3
