                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 23.6.1998
                                                                                PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                            MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                           To the notifying parties
Subject: Case No IV/M.1184 - TRAVELERS/CITICORP
              Notification of 20.05.1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 20 May 1998, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
       concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by
       which the Travelers Group Inc. (“Travelers”), US, enters into a full merger within
       the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the Council Regulation with Citicorp, US.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does
       not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.        THE PARTIES
3.     Travelers is a US undertaking principally involved in investment services, including
       asset management, consumer finance services and life and non-life insurance services.
       Its presence in the Community is essentially limited to investment banking services
       provided by its subsidiary Salomon Smith Barney Holdings Inc.
4.     Citicorp is a US undertaking principally involved in commercial banking services.
       Citicorp also performs a limited range of investment banking services.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

II.      CONCENTRATION
5.    Citicorp will merge with and into a newly formed, wholly owned subsidiary of
      Travelers. Following completion Travelers will change its name to Citigroup Inc.
6.    This transaction constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of
      the Regulation.
III.     COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.    The combined aggregate world-wide turnover of the undertakings concerned
      exceeded 5,000 million ECU in the last financial year (Travelers: 33,163 million
      ECU; Citicorp: 19,061 million ECU). The aggregate Community-wide turnover of
      each of them was more than 250 million ECU (Travelers: [… ]1 million ECU;
      Citicorp: [… ] 2 million ECU).
8.    The undertakings concerned do not generate more than two-thirds of their
      aggregated Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
      Hence, the concentration has a Community dimension.
IV.      COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
         A.        Relevant product markets
9.    The notifying parties state that there will be horizontal market overlaps in the
      following relevant markets: corporate banking, merger and acquisitions advisory
      services, securities underwriting, securities trading/broker-dealer activities, foreign
      exchange trading, derivatives trading, money markets and asset management.
      Moreover, the notifying parties have a vertical relationship in custodian services,
      cash management services and underwriting of speciality property and casualty
      insurances.
10. However, in the present case it is not necessary to conclusively define the relevant
      product markets because, even on the narrowest market definition, the concentration
      does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
      competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
      area.
1 business secret: between ECU 3,5 – 4 million
2 business secret: between ECU 2,5 – 3 million
                                               2

        B.     Relevant geographic markets
11. The notifying parties state that the relevant geographic markets are either national or
     international in scope depending on the sector.
12. However, in the present case it is not necessary to conclusively define the relevant
     product markets because, even on the narrowest market definition, the concentration
     does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
     competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
     area.
        C.     Competitive assessment
13. The parties market shares in the sectors for commercial banking services, investment
     banking as well as the other markets identified by the parties will be well below 15%.
     Moreover, the overlaps will be very small.
14. In view of the market position of the parties to the concentration, it appears that the
    notified operation will have no or de minimis impact on competition in the EEA.
    Consequently, the proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant
    position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in
    the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
V.      CONCLUSION
14. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
     Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                        For the Commission
                                              3
