                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 23.04.1998
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                    To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No. IV/M.1131 - AGF/Royal
1.              On 19 March 1998 the Commission received a notification of a proposed
                concentration by which the undertaking Assurances Générales de France
                (“AGF”) takes over Royal Nederland Verzekeringsgroep N.V. (RN) by
                acquiring control of its holding company European Partners for Insurance
                Co-operation S.A. (EPIC).
2.              After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
                notified operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No
                4064/89 and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
                Common market or a substantial part of it.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

I. THE PARTIES INVOLVED AND THE OPERATION
3.            AGF, with headquarters in Paris, is an insurance company active in life and
              non-life insurance and in re-insurance, in the EEA and world-wide.
4.           RN is a Dutch company holding participation in insurance companies
             active in the life and non-life insurance industries. RN is controlled by
             AMB via the holding company EPIC. EPIC is a wholly owned subsidiary
             of AMB and a mere vehicle holding company, which is not regarded as a
             party to the proposed concentration.
5.           The proposed concentration will be effected by the acquisition of all shares
             of EPIC by AGF. The take over will grant AGF sole control over EPIC.
             According to a tri-partite Agreement concluded between Generali, the
             German Allianz AG and AGF on 30 December 1997, the take over will be
             effected as soon as Generali has obtained at least 70% of the share capital
             of the German insurer Aachener und Münchener Beteiligungsgesellschaft
             (AMB).1
II. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.            AGF and RN have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover, calculated in
              accordance with Article 5 (3) (b) of the Regulation, in excess of ECU 5,000
              million (AGF: ECU 10,680 million, RN: ECU 578 million). Each of them has
              a Community-wide turnover, calculated in accordance with Article 5 (3) (b) of
              the Regulation of more than ECU 250 million (AGF: ECU 9,183 million, RN:
              ECU 578 million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
              aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same member State.
              The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension. It does not
              constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement pursuant to Article
              57 of that Agreement.
III. PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT
Relevant product markets
7.         Life and non-life insurance can be divided into as many product markets as
           there are different kinds of risk covered. Their characteristics, premiums and
           purposes are distinct and there is typically no substitutability for the
           consumer between the different risks insured (see case IV/M.812 -
           Allianz/Vereinte or case IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP). For the purpose of the
           present case it is, however, not necessary to define conclusively the relevant
           product markets as, even with the narrowest market definition, the concentration
           does not create or strengthen a dominant position.
Relevant geographical markets
1  Generali shall then use its best efforts to cause AMB to sell 100% of the shares of EPIC to AGF.
                                                     2

8.       Due to the present and future measures to liberalise intra-community trade
         in services, insurance markets tend to become more open to community-
         wide competition, in particular for commercial and industrial policies.
         Nevertheless, the markets for life and non-life insurance for private
         households have been mainly considered to be national, as a result of
         national distribution channels, the established market structures, fiscal
         constraints and differing regulatory systems (see case IV/M.759 - Sun
         Alliance/Royal Insurance). In the present case, however, the definition of the
         relevant geographical markets for credit insurance can be left open because
         any alternative geographic market definitions would not lead to a dominant
         position.
9.      There are no markets affected by the concentration in any member State or
        in the Community as a whole. AGF and RN are active in the life insurance,
        non-life and re-insurance business. The parties identified overlapping
        activities only in liability insurance, motor insurance, maritime transport
        insurance, fire insurance, accident insurance and life insurance in the
        Netherlands. In the Dutch market, the combined aggregate shares remain
        below 10%. The increment in shares is marginal, since AGF’s shares do
        not exceed 1.6% in any product market. Therefore, the concentration does
        not lead to the creation of a dominant position. The take over does not
        have any significant effects on markets outside of the Netherlands.
IV. CONCLUSION
10.      For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
         operation and to declare it compatible with the Common market. This
         decision is adopted in application of Article 6 (1) (b) of Council Regulation
         (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                   For the Commission,
                                         3
