                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 14/08/1998
                                                                               PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                            MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                        To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M.1273: Credit Suisse/Nikko/MSA
Notification of 15 July 1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC)
No 4064/89, as last amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 1310/97.
1.     On 15 July 1998 CS Structured Credit Fund, Ltd (“CS”), and Nikko Europe plc
       (“Nikko Europe”), notified an operation involving the acquisition of joint control,
       within the meaning of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 (“the Regulation”), of
       MSA Acquisitions Co Ltd (“MSA Acquisitions”), a company currently under the
       sole control of Nikko Europe.
I         THE PARTIES
2.     CS is a closed-ended Cayman Island limited liability company incorporated for the
       purpose of investing in a broad range of securities, derivatives and other assets. It is
       a wholly owned subsidiary of Credit Suisse First Boston, which is part of the Credit
       Suisse Group (“the Credit Suisse group”).
3.     Nikko Europe is the European and Middle Eastern arm of The Nikko Securities Co.,
       Ltd, a Japanese security house and investment bank. Nikko Europe provides
       brokerage and investment banking services in the equity, bond and derivative
       markets, together with economic and investment research and corporate finance
       advice.
4.     MSA Acquisitions is the company which was originally used to acquire RoadChef
       (see below) and which is now its immediate corporate parent. The issued share
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

      capital of MSA Acquisitions is divided into ‘A’ and ‘B’ shares. A total of [..]1 ‘A’
      shares have been issued, representing just under one-quarter of the issued share
      capital of MSA Acquisitions, and are held by the management of RoadChef (“the
      Management”). A total of [..] 2 ‘B’ shares have been issued, representing just over
      three-quarters of the entire issued share capital of MSA Acquisitions, and are held by
      MSA Holdings Limited (“MSA Holdings”).
5.    RoadChef is a wholly owned subsidiary of MSA Acquisitions, and is the third largest
      operator of motorway service areas in the UK. Its core activities are the provision of
      fuel and forecourt services, catering, retail services and lodge accommodation.
      Nikko Europe played a key part in arranging and providing the finance for the
      acquisition of RoadChef by MSA Acquisitions.
6.    The entire issued share capital of MSA Holdings, the corporate parent of MSA
      Acquisitions, is held on trust by SPV Management Limited (“SPV”), a private
      limited company incorporated in England & Wales. SPV is wholly owned by its
      management, which consists of two private individuals. SPV’s business is to provide
      directors and other management services to special purpose companies (in this case
      MSA Holdings Limited) and, as and when required, to hold the equity share capital
      of such companies on discretionary trust, the beneficiaries of which are a number of
      UK charities. [ .. ]3 Neither SPV nor MSA Holdings play an active part in the day
      to day management of MSA Acquisitions.
II       THE OPERATION
7.    The notified operation is a change in respect of MSA Acquisitions from sole control
      by Nikko Europe, to joint control by Nikko Europe and CS.
8.    The table below summarises the shareholdings and share warrant holdings in MSA
      Acquisitions before and after the notified operation
Table: Control of MSA Acquisitions before and after notified operation
[ … . ]4
9.    The Management’s holding of [ .. ]5 ‘A’ shares gives them certain rights, but no
      rights which would give them the power to block actions which determine the
      strategic commercial behaviour of MSA Acquisitions. Neither MSA Holdings,
      which has [ .. ]6 shares, nor its corporate parent SPV, play an active part in the day
      to day management of MSA Acquisitions.
1   Deleted business secret
2   Deleted business secret
3   Text considered as business secret has been replaced by square brackets
4   Deleted business secret
5   Deleted business secret
6   Deleted business secret
                                                    2

10. Nikko Europe has no shareholdings in MSA Acquisitions as such, but protects its
     investment in the company by the possession of warrants entitling it to subscribe at
     any time for up to [ a substantial majority of the ]7 shares in the company. The
     warrants therefore give Nikko the ability on very short notice to acquire over [ a
     substantial majority of the ]8 issued share capital of the company.
11. Under the terms of the operation, [..] 9 ‘B’ shares currently held by MSA Holdings
     will be converted into ‘C’ shares and transferred to CS. The shareholding of MSA
     Holdings in MSA Acquisitions will therefore diminish to [just over half the issued
     share capital]10 ‘B’ shares. However, a shareholders’ agreement (“the shareholders’
     agreement”) to be entered into as part of the transaction will give the holders of both
     ‘B’and ‘C’shares, that is MSA Holdings and CS respectively, veto rights (“strategic
     veto rights”) over a number of matters relating to the strategic and commercial
     behaviour of MSA Acquisitions. [ … ]11 Even if either Nikko or CS exercised their
     respective warrants in order to acquire additional shares, this would not enable them
     to defeat the strategic veto rights of the other class of shareholders under the
     shareholders’agreement.
III     THE CONCENTRATION
12. The operation represents a change from sole control of MSA Acquisitions by Nikko
     Europe, to joint control by Nikko Europe and CS.
IV      COMMUNITY DIMENSION
13. Because this is a transition from sole to joint control of a pre-existing company, the
     undertakings concerned are each of the jointly-controlling companies, including the
     initial shareholder, but not the target, MSA Acquisitions. Nikko Europe and CS are
     therefore the undertakings concerned.
14. Both Nikko Europe and CS are part of financial groups, Nikko Europe being part of
     the group headed by The Nikko Securities Co (“the Nikko group”) of Japan, and CS
     being a part of the Credit Suisse group. Their turnovers for the purposes of Article
     1(2) of the Regulation have to be calculated in accordance with the provisions of
     Article 5(3)(a) of the same Regulation. On this basis the worldwide turnover of the
     Credit Suisse group in 1997 was in excess of ECU 25 000 million, and the turnover
     of the Nikko group was in excess of ECU 3 000 million. The Community wide
     turnover of the Credit Suisse group was in excess of ECU 9 000 million and the
     turnover of the Nikko group in excess of ECU 1 000 million.
15. The Nikko group achieves more than two-thirds of its Community-wide turnover in
     the UK, but the Credit Suisse group does not derive more than two-thirds of its
     Community-wide turnover within any one member state.
7   Text in square brackets replaces figure considered as business secret
8   Text in square brackets replaces figure considered as business secret
9   Deleted business secret
10  Text in square brackets replaces figure considered as business secret
11  Text considered as business secret has been replaced by square brackets
                                                    3

16. The notification does not fall to be treated as an EFTA co-operation case.
V      JOINT VENTURE
Sole control by Nikko prior to the notified operation
17. The parties argue that, although Nikko Europe has no direct shareholding interest in
     MSA Acquisitions, it is nonetheless in sole control within the meaning of the
     regulation owing to a combination of the share warrants and other factors.
     17.1. The role of the corporate parent, SPV [ .. ] 12 acting through MSA Holdings, is
            not to manage companies as such but to provide a [ .. ] 13 facility for the legal
            ownership of shares [ ....]14
     17.2. MSA Acquisitions, has undertaken to Nikko Europe that it will not, without
            the consent of the majority of holders of ‘B’ shares (in this case MSA
            Holdings), undertake a wide range of acts relating to the strategic commercial
            behaviour of MSA Acquisitions[ .. ]15.
     17.3. The ‘A’ shareholders of MSA Acquisitions, that is the Management, have a
            right to appoint a maximum of two directors, provided they have at least 10%
            of issued shares. The ‘B’ shareholders, that is MSA Holdings, have the right
            to appoint up to three directors. The Nikko employees currently on the board
            of MSA Acquisitions are currently able to outvote the Management director.
            But, even if both sides appointed the maximum number of directors permitted
            to them, Nikko, through its influence on MSA Holdings, could still retain
            control of the board.
18. The Commission Notice of 2.3.98 on the concept of concentration under the
     Regulation (98/C 66/02) states at paragraph 15 that an option to purchase or convert
     shares cannot in itself confer sole control unless the option will be exercised in the
     near future according to legally binding agreements. However, the likely exercise of
     such an option can be taken into account as an additional element which, together
     with other elements, may lead to the conclusion that there is sole control. The
     Commission considers that the combination of the share warrants with the factors
     outlined in paragraph 17 above is sufficient to confer sole control, within the
     meaning of the Regulation, on Nikko.
     Joint control after the operation
19. After the operation the Management will still be able to appoint two directors.
     However MSA Holdings will now be able to appoint a maximum of only two rather
     than three. CS will be able to appoint one director.
12 Text considered as business secret has been replaced by square brackets
13 Text considered as business secret has been replaced by square brackets
14 Text considered as business secret has been replaced by square brackets
15  Text considered as business secret has been replaced by square brackets
                                                   4

20. The transition to joint control occurs because Nikko Europe procures the transfer of
     some of the ‘B’ class shareholdings of MSA Holdings to CS (and their conversion to
     ‘C’ class shares) as well as [..]16 of Nikko Europe’s share warrants. At the same
     time the terms of the shareholders’ agreement will mean that both MSA Holdings
     and CS acquire strategic veto rights.
21. After the operation the Management are in essentially the same position in terms of
     their level of influence as they were prior to the operation. MSA Holdings still holds
     the majority of the shares, and its corporate structure and function would still cause
     it to defer to the wishes of Nikko Europe. But Nikko Europe is no longer the only
     entity able to exercise decisive influence, because of the strategic veto rights afforded
     to CS through the shareholders’agreement. Nor can CS be said to be the only entity
     with decisive influence, because of the veto rights accorded to MSA Holdings by the
     shareholders’agreement.
22. Joint control within the meaning of the Regulation arises from the fact that Nikko
     Europe and CS are both in a position to exercise decisive influence.
VI      COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
Relevant product and geographic markets
23. According to the notifying parties, the business of the joint venture is the operation
     of motorway service stations in the UK (in which its market share is under 25%).
     However, as neither of the parents is otherwise involved in this business activity, the
     issue of horizontal overlap does not arise, and product and geographic market
     definitions do not need to be considered further.
VII     CONGLOMERATE ASPECTS
24. Neither CS nor Nikko nor any of their subsidiaries or undertakings in which they
     have an interest are active in the business of operating motorway service areas in the
     UK or in any other Member State, nor in any business which might be considered
     upstream or neighbouring to this market.
VIII    CONCLUSION
25. In view of the above the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
     functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article
     6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                                For the Commission,
16  Text considered as business secret has been replaced by square brackets
                                                    5
