                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 24.08.1998
                                                                         D(98)
                                                                          PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                              MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                         To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject:            Case No. IV/M. 1280 – KKR/Willis Corroon
                     Notification of 22, July 1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Commission
                     Regulation No. 4064/89
1.      On 22 July 1998 the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration by
        which the undertaking KKR Associates II takes over the Willis Corroon Group by
        acquisition of the entire issued and to be issued share capital in the target company. The
        operation constitutes a concentration in the meaning of Article 3 (1) b of the Regulation,
        leading to sole control of the whole of the target company.
I. THE PARTIES INVOLVED AND THE OPERATION
2.      KKR Associates is a US company member of the KKR Group which invests capital in
        management buy-outs on behalf of itself and its investors.
3.      The Willis Corroon Group is an international insurance broker and risk management
        consultant headquartered in the UK. It provides a range of risk management and broking
        services to clients worldwide.
4.      The KKR Group via the recently formed Trinity Group has announced a recommended
        cash offer for all of the shares of Willis Corroon Group plc. The ultimate holding
        company of Trinity Group, TA I, is currently wholly owned by the KKR Fund, a private
        equity fund managed by KKR Associates. On the offer being declared unconditional five
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium - Office:
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

       US and UK insurance Carriers will each subscribe for no more than 5% of the share
       capital in TA I. As a result the voting shares will approximately be held as to 81% by the
       KKR Fund and as to 19% by the Insurance Carriers. It is therefore clear that on the
       successful completion of the offer, KKR Associates will have sole control over Willis
       Corroon. The operation is subject to the condition that all the necessary regulatory
       clearances will have been obtained.
II. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.     KKR and Willis Corroon have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover, calculated in
       accordance with Article 5 (3) (b) of the Regulation in excess of ECU 5,000 million
       (KKR: ECU [… ]1 million; Willis Corroon: ECU [… ]2 million). Each of them has a
       Community-wide turnover of more than ECU 250 million (KKR: ECU [… ] 3 million;
       Willis Corroon: ECU [… ]4 million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of
       their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same member State. The
       notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
III. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
A. Relevant product market
Insurance Brokerage
6.       Referring to the approach the Commission took concerning the insurance
         underwriting industry, the parties suggest to draw a distinction between brokerage
         in respect of life insurance, non-life insurance and re-insurance. The parties also
         suggest that within the non-life brokerage sector, a distinction can be made
         between personal and commercial lines.
7.       It should be noted, however, that the activities of brokers are different from those
         of (re)insurers and subject to a different regulatory framework. The latter offer
         their own services to their clients, whereas brokers act as intermediaries between
         the supply-side (insurance companies) and the demand side (clients seeking
         insurance). From a demand side perspective, clients requiring different kinds of
         insurance policies could well turn to one and the same broker, provided that a
         broker is able to procure insurance coverage for different kinds of risks. The
         parties claim that there is a high degree of supply-side substitutability in brokerage
         activities because of a common set of skills required which applies to all sorts of
         insurance products. While brokers in principle are free to offer a wide range of
         insurance products, it cannot be ignored, however, that at least for certain product
         lines or sectors, a considerable degree of knowledge and specialisation is required
         in order to compete effectively. This is true, for example, for credit insurance and
         reinsurance products.
1    deleted for publication
2    deleted for publication
3    deleted for publication
4    deleted for publication
                                                  2

8.      In the present case, however, there are no overlapping activities between the
        parties and the creation or strengthening of a dominant position can be excluded
        with any alternative product market definition. Therefore, the product market
        definition can be left open.
Reinsurance
9.      Reinsurance constitutes a separate market because of its purpose of spreading
        risks between insurers, the need to pool risks and the less stringent regulatory
        framework. Reinsurance can be divided in the life and non-life sector.
B. Relevant geographical market
Insurance brokerage
10.     Although the Commission has recognised that insurance markets, in particular as
        far as commercial clients are concerned, are becoming more open to intra-
        Community competition, life and non-life insurance are so far regarded as mainly
        national. However, it can be observed that the international or cross-border
        activities of independent brokers have contributed to the increasing
        internationalisation in the insurance industry because in order to seek out the best
        offers for their clients brokers as a rule turn to insurers world-wide.
11.      In the present case, however, the geographical market definition can be left open,
        given the fact that the parties are not engaged in the same business and the
        concentration with any alternative geographical market definition will not impede
        effective competition in the Common market or a substantial part of it.
Reinsurance
12.     The relevant market for reinsurance is global because of the international
        dimension of transactions and the less extensive control of national authorities (see
        M. 862-Axa/UAP; M. 1043-BAT/Zürich).
IV. ASSESSMENT
A. Insurance brokerage market
13.   None of the parties are engaged in business activities in the same product market.
      KKR is an investment firm, which makes equity investments in management buyouts
      on behalf of investors, primarily US banks and pension funds. None of the
      companies controlled by KKR is active in the markets of Willis Corroon.
14.   The take over by KKR may enhance the competitiveness of Willis Corroon on the
      insurance brokerage market, enabling it to improve efficiency and to initiate
      necessary innovations. KKR, however, does not intend to start brokerage activities on
      its own. Its interest is confined to a financial investment in Willis Corroon on behalf of its
      customers. Looking at the present market situation in the insurance brokerage market,
      the operation does not lead to the creation or strengthening of a dominant position
      of the parties in any relevant geographic market. At present Willis Corroon is
      ranked 4th among the world’s 10 largest insurance brokers. The global brokerage
      market is a very fragmented one: There are two main players, market leader
                                                  3

      Marsh&McLennan (gross revenues of 4,297 MECU) and the Aon Group (gross
      revenues of 3,056 MECU), then comes Sedgwick Group and Willis Corroon (with
      revenues of 1,180 and 891 MECU respectively) and finally, there is a vast number
      of individual small and medium sized brokers with similar market shares. Both on an
      international as well as on a national level, the brokerage market appears to be an
      increasingly competitive one, due to the activities of direct insurers using their own
      modern distribution channels and the competitive pressure exercised by banks acting
      as intermediaries. This fact is also true for the UK market where Willis Corroon
      exercises the majority of its activities.
B. Reinsurance
15.   KKR exercises decisive influence over two insurance companies, the Bristol West
      Insurance Group and the Rhine Re. Both companies are active on neighbouring
      markets of Willis Corroon. Bristol, a US based car insurer, does not carry out
      business in Europe. Rhine Re offers all sorts of life and non-life reinsurance
      products and services. Rhine Re is only ranked 66th as global reinsurer, the company
      achieves global market shares of below 1% by gross written premiums not
      exceeding [… ]5% in any country in which it carries out business. Transactions with
      Willis corroon represent only [… ]6 % of the Rhine Re’s brokered business.
      Considering the above mentioned circumstances, the fact that one of KKR’s
      companies is active in a neighbouring market of the target company is not expected
      to produce any perceivable effects with regard to effective competition in the
      reinsurance market.
16.      It follows from the foregoing that the concentration will not crea te or strengthen a
         dominant position of the parties in the Common Market or any substantial part of
         it.
V. CONCLUSION
17.      For the above reasons, the Commission decided not to oppose the notified
         operation and to declare it compatible with the Common market. This decision is
         adopted in application of Article 6 (1) (b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                            For the Commission
5   deleted for publication ; between 3 and 7
6   deleted for publication ; between 3 and 7
                                                  4
