                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 21.08.1998
                                                                                PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                             MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                        to the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M.1244 - BANKAMERICA/NATIONSBANK
              Notification of 24.07.1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 24 July 1998, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
       concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by
       which BankAmerica Corporation enters into a full merger within the meaning of
       Article 3(1)(a) of the Council Regulation with NationsBank .
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does
       not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.        THE PARTIES
3.     BankAmerica and NationsBank are multi-bank holding companies in the USA
       headquartered in California and North Carolina respectively. BankAmerica provides
       retail banking services principally in the Western United States and Texas and
       corporate banking services throughout the USA and internationally. NationsBank
       provides retail banking services in the South Western, Mid-Atlantic and mid-western
       United States as well as in Texas and New Mexico and corporate banking services
       throughout the USA and to a limited extent on an international basis.
4.     The scale of operations of both banks in the European Community is very much
       smaller and services are addressed mainly to corporate clients. Although
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

     BankAmerica has branch and subsidiary operations in nine Member States,
     NationsBank’s branch and subsidiary operations are limited to the United Kingdom
     and Germany, where bank operations overlap with those of BankAmerica.
II.     CONCENTRATION
5.   NationsBank will form a new subsidiary, NationsBank (DE) and will merge with and
     into NationsBank (DE) as the surviving corporation. Thereafter BankAmerica will
     merge with and into NationsBank (DE) with NationsBank (DE) as the surviving
     corporation which will change its name to BankAmerica Corporation.
6.   This transaction constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of
     the Regulation.
III.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.   The combined aggregate world-wide turnover of the undertakings concerned
     exceeded 5,000 million ECU in the last financial year (BankAmerica: 15,446 million
     ECU; NationsBank: 14,619 million ECU). The aggregate Community-wide turnover
     of each of them was more than 250 million ECU (BankAmerica: 1,130.8 million
     ECU; NationsBank: 652.7 million ECU).
8.   The undertakings concerned do not generate more than two-thirds of their
     aggregated Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
     Hence, the concentration has a Community dimension.
IV.     COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
        A.     Relevant product markets
9.   The notifying parties state that there will be horizontal market overlaps in the
     following relevant segments of activity: corporate banking, money market trading,
     fixed income trading, foreign exchange, derivatives and project finance operations.
10. However, in the present case it is not necessary to conclusively define the relevant
     product markets because, even on the narrowest market definition, the concentration
     does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
     competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
     area.
        B.     Relevant geographic markets
11. The notifying parties state that the relevant geographic markets are either national or
     international in scope depending on the sector.
12. However, in the present case it is not necessary to conclusively define the relevant
     product markets because, even on the narrowest market definition, the concentration
     does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
                                              2

      competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
      area.
        C.      Competitive assessment
13. The parties market shares in the sectors for commercial banking services, investment
      banking as well as the other markets identified by the parties will be well below 15%.
      Moreover, the overlaps will be very small.
14. In view of the market position of the parties to the concentration, it appears that the
     notified operation will have no or de minimis impact on competition in the EEA.
     Consequently, the proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant
     position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in
     the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
V.      CONCLUSION
15. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                         For the Commission,
                                              3
