                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 21.12.98
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                           To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject:         Case No IV/M. 1340 – BNP / DRESDNER BANK – AUSTRIAN JV
                 Notification of 20 November 1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                 No 4064/89
1.     On 20 November 1998 the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 4064/89 by which Banque Nationale
       de Paris (“BNP”)and Dresdner Bank AG (“Dresdner”) will create a joint venture bank in
       Vienna under the name of BNP – Dresdner European Bank AG, Wien (“the new joint
       venture”).
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 4064/89 and does not raise
       serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES’ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
3.     BNP is a French bank whose main activities are commercial banking and other financial
       services. Dresdner is a German bank whose main activities are commercial and corporate
       banking and other financial services. Both banks are among the Europe’s leading banking
       groups and are active worldwide.
4.     The new joint venture will be established as a stock company (Aktiengesellschaft) under
       Austrian law. BNP and Dresdner will own 50% each of the share capital and will jointly
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

     control the joint venture. Furthermore, the new joint venture will perform on a lasting basis
     all the functions of an autonomous economic entity.
5.   The setting up of the new joint venture takes place within the framework of a co-operation
     agreement signed by BNP and Dresdner in 1993 and approved under Article 85(3) of the
     Treaty by Commission’s decision of 1996 (the “Article 85(3) decision”)1. The corresponding
     exemption was granted for 10 years (i.e. up to 2005). The co-operation agreement provided,
     inter alia, that the two banks would combine their activities into joint subsidiaries in
     European countries other than Germany and France. Pursuant to the agreement BNP and
     Dresdner have so far established seven banking joint ventures operating in Central and
     Eastern Europe (Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Croatia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and
     Russia). The new joint venture will act as a holding company running the banking joint
     ventures in Eastern and Central Europe. To this end BNP’s and Dresdner’s stakes in these
     banks will be transferred to the new joint venture.
6.   The new joint venture will also be active in the wholesale banking sector.
II.  CONCENTRATION
7.   The notified operation is a concentration under Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8.   The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of the undertakings concerned exceeds 5,000
     million ECU (BNP: 6.7 bn ECU; Dresdner:7.3 bn ECU in 1997). The aggregate Community
     wide turnover of each of them is in excess of 250 million ECU, but they do not generate
     more than two thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same
     Member State. Hence the notified concentration has a Community dimension.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
Relevant product market
9.   The notifying parties consider that the relevant products market are short and medium term
     loans, deposit taking, execution of national and international payment transfers, foreign
     exchange products and advisory service to large corporation and financial institutions.
     According to the Commission’s practice in the banking sector, these activities are considered
     to be part of the so- called wholesale or corporate banking market 2.In the present case, it is
     not necessary to delineate further the relevant product market because, even on the
     narrowest market definition, the concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant
     position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA
     or any substantial part of that area.
Relevant geographic market
1   OJ L 188, 27/10/1996, p. 37
2   See, for example, cases IV/M. 1172 - Fortis AG/Generale Bank, IV/M. 1096 - Societé Générale/Hambros
    Bank, IV/M. 1089- Paribas Belgique/Paribas Nederland, IV/M. - 1029 Merita/Nordbanken and the Art. 85(3)
    decision, ante.
                                                     2

10. The parties consider that the relevant geographic market is Austria and that, besides cross
     border transactions, neighbouring markets will be affected only indirectly by the activities of
     BNP- Dresdner European Bank in Austria. This definition of the relevant geographic market
     appears appropriate and is coherent with previous decisions where the Commission has
     considered that banking markets are still essentially national in scope.3
Assessment
A.    Dominance
11. The concentration will not have any appreciable effect on the Austrian wholesale banking
     market. BNP has no activities in Austria. Dresdner is present in Austria through a subsidiary
     mainly active in the retail and corporate banking sectors which has an estimated market share
     in both markets well below 1%. Moreover, the Austrian banking market is characterised by
     the strong presence of national players. According to the estimations provided by the parties,
     the six largest Austrian banks have a combined market share above 80% of the Austrian
     wholesale banking market.
B. Co-ordination of competitive behaviour
12. The new joint venture will supervise and control the banking joint ventures in Central and
     Eastern Europe. In this context it is to be borne in mind that the banking joint ventures in
     Central and Eastern Europe are set up pursuant to the above mentioned co-operation
     agreement between BNP and Dresdner. That agreement was exempted by the Article 85(3)
     decision for 10 years. The establishment of the new joint venture acting as the holding
     company of the Central and Eastern European joint fits in the parents’ co-operation
     agreement and, as such, benefits from the exemption granted under Article 85(3). Therefore
     there is no need to examine the case under Art. 2.4 of the Merger Regulation.
V.   CONCLUSION
13. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and
     to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
     decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No.
     4064/89.
                                                         For the Commission,
3   The Art. 85(3) decision, ante.
                                                  3
