                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 18.09.1998
                                                                               PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                            MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                         To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M. 1306 –BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY/GENERAL RE
              Notification of 20 August 1998 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No
              4064/89
1.      On 20 August 1998 the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
        by which the undertaking Berkshire Hathaway acquires sole control over the
        undertaking General Re by purchase of all outstanding shares in the Target Company.
I.               THE PARTIES INVOLVED AND THE OPERATION
2.      Berkshire is a holding company owning subsidiaries engaged in a number of diverse
        business activities, the most important of which is property and casualty insurance and
        reinsurance business through a number of subsidiaries.
3.      General Re is a holding company for global reinsurance and related risk management,
        owning General Re Corporation and controlling Cologne Re, two large reinsurers,
        mainly involved in property/casualty insurance world-wide.
4.      The transaction will involve two stages. According to the Merger Agreement dated 19
        June 1998 a newly formed subsidiary of Berkshire, NBH, will first acquire all of the
        voting shares of Berkshire and General Re Corporation. Second, two subsidiaries of
        NBH will be created and each of them will merge with Berkshire and General Re
        respectively. As a result, NBH, according to the Stock Option Agreement of 19 June
        1998 will acquire all of the issued and outstanding common stock of Berkshire and
        General Re. The transaction will therefore constitute a concentration in the meaning of
        Art. 3(1)b of the Merger Regulation.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

II.            COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.     Berkshire Hathaway and General Re have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover,
       calculated in accordance with Article 5 (3) (b) of the Regulation in excess of ECU 5,000
       million. Each of them has a Community-wide turnover of more than ECU 250 million,
       but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide
       turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a
       Community dimension.
III.           COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
Relevant Product Market
6.     The market concerned by the concentration is the global market for reinsurance.
       The Commission has established that reinsurance is a market separate from
       insurance because of its purpose of spreading risks between insurers. It is conducted
       between insurers and reinsurers on an international basis because of the need to pool
       the risks. The regulatory framework is less stringent than that of life or non-life
       direct insurance. For these reasons the reinsurance market gives rise to different
       conditions of competition compared to life and non-life insurance (see for example
       cases No. IV/M. 1043-BAT/Zürich and No. IV/M.1280-KKR/Willis Corroon).
       Reinsurance can be further subdivided into the life and non-life segment (see for
       example cases No. IV/M.1017-Hannover Re/Skandia and No. IV/M.880 Schweizer
       Re/Uniorias).
7.     For the purposes of the present decision it is not necessary to exactly define the
       product market since with every alternative definition effective competition will not
       be impeded on the Common market or any substantial part of it.
Relevant geographical market
8.       Given the need to pool risks on an international basis and the conduct of reinsurance
         business on a worldwide basis, the geographical reference market for reinsurance is
         global (see for example cases No. IV/M. 862-AXA/UAP and No. IV/M.813-
         Allianz/Hermes).
IV.      ASSESSMENT
9.       The parties have overlaps in the global reinsurance sector. Independently from any
         further subdivision of the overall reinsurance market there are no markets where
         the concentration would give rise to competitive concerns.
10.      On the overall global reinsurance market, Berkshire is at present ranked 20th
         largest consolidated global reinsurer and achieves a market share of less than [… ]1
         General Re is ranked 4th global reinsurer and has around [… ]2. In the non-life
         segment of reinsurance Berkshire achieves less than [… ]3, General Re has [… ]4.
         The parties after the concentration will achieve combined market shares both in
1    Deleted for publication (a negligible market share)
2    Deleted for publication (between 1 and 10 %)
3    Deleted for publication (a negligible market share)
4    Deleted for publication (between 1 and 10 %)
                                                     2

        the overall reinsurance market and in the non-life segment of approximately [… ]5,
        the increment with both definitions being less than [… ]6.
11.     Figures for the life-sector are not available but are negligible in the present case
        since Berkshire only wrote [… ]7 between 1995-1997. In any case the life segment
        certainly represents a less important part of the premium income and market shares
        of a reinsurer, given the fact that life insurers fully finance expected future
        payments and as a rule cede a lower proportion of total assumed risk volume to
        reinsurers compared to non-life insurers.
12.     Main competitors of the parties are professional reinsurers. According to the
        parties, the market leaders Munich Re and Swiss Re/NCM achieve market shares
        of [… ]8 and [… ]9 respectively, which is almost twice than the market shares,
        which will be held by the parties after the merger. Other important competitors are
        Employers Re (5%), Hanover Re (4%), BAT/Zurich (4%) or Assicurazioni
        Generali SpA (3%).
13.     According to the legal provisions governing reinsurance law in most European
        countries and for reasons of risk spreading direct insurers normally seek insurance
        coverage with many different reinsurance companies. This peculiarity of the
        insurance market offers a chance to smaller competitors with less significant
        market share to effectively compete with big reinsurance companies. Therefore,
        customers are not entirely dependent on one reinsurer but have the possibility to
        choose between a number of suppliers.
14.     There are no major regulatory barriers to market entrance in the global reinsurance
        market as the reinsurance business is amongst the least regulated. In recent years
        there have been a number of market entrances world-wide.
15.     It follows from the foregoing that the concentration will not create or strengthen a
        dominant position of the parties in the Common Market or any substantial part of
        it.
V.      CONCLUSION
16.     For the above reasons, the Commission decided not to oppose the notified
        operation and to declare it compatible with the Common market. This decision is
        adopted in application of Article 6 (1) (b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                                 For the Commission,
5   Deleted for publication (between 1 and 10 %)
6   Deleted for publication (a negligible market share)
7   Deleted for publication (negligible number of life reinsurance contracts)
8   Deleted for publication (between 10 and 20 %)
9   Deleted for publication (between 10 and 20 %)
                                                     3
