                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                      Brussels, 11.02.1999
                                                                      SG (99) D/1163
 In the published version of this decision, some                             PUBLIC VERSION
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information                            MERGER PROCEDURE
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                    ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
 general description.
       To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M.1367 – INCHCAPE HOLDING HELLAS/EFG EUROBANK
             Notification of 11.01.1999 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On January 11, 1999, the Commission received notification of a concentration pursuant
       to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89, by which the undertakings Inchcape
       Holdings Hellas S.A. and EFG Eurobank S.A. acquire joint control of a newly created
       undertaking which constitutes a joint venture.
I.     The parties
2.     Inchcape Holdings Hellas S.A. (“Inchcape Holdings”) is a holding company
       established under Greek law. The principal activities of the Inchcape companies in
       Greece are the distribution, sale and lease of new and used motor vehicles and the
       provision of insurance services. Inchcape Holdings is a member of the Inchcape Group
       which is an international services and marketing group operating in several countries
       world-wide.
3.     EFG Eurobank S.A. (“EFG Eurobank”) is a bank established under Greek law and
       operating in Greece, offering a full range of banking and financial services.
4.     Inchcape Holdings and EFG Eurobank are the parent companies of the joint venture
       which is herewith created. The joint venture, which will be called Autofin Bank S.A.,
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

    will take the form of a banking company to be incorporated under Greek law. The joint
    venture will be active in the provision of consumer financing for the purchase of new
    and used cars, motorcycles, scooters and leisure boats.
5.  Toyota Hellas S.A. (a company belonging to the Inchcape Group) and EFG Eurobank
    already jointly control Tefin S.A. (Tefin). Tefin was set up in 1994 as a trading
    company with a view to engage in credit sales of cars through the network of Toyota
    dealers. As Tefin is a trading company it cannot provide banking loans itself nor
    engage in other banking transactions in the field of consumer financing, such field
    being reserved by the Greek law to banking institutions. Thus, in 1995 Tefin ceased
    sales on credit to consumers; instead, Tefin has concentrated on its main activity,
    which is the sale of cars, and referred the consumer finance part of the deals to EFG
    Eurobank. In setting up the joint venture, Inchcape and EFG Eurobank decided that
    this will take over that part of EFG Eurobank’s business which is presently being
    referred by Tefin. Tefin is not an undertaking concerned in the present concentration.
II. Full function joint venture
6.  The joint venture will be controlled in accordance with a 50:50 interest of the parent
    companies in its share capital. The Board of Directors will be composed of 10
    directors, 5 directors being nominated by each party. The Board of Directors shall be in
    quorum if an equal number of Directors appointed by each party is present or
    represented and decisions shall be adopted by majority of four fifths of all the members
    of the Board. Matters of decisive influence, such as the appointment and mandates of
    the General Manager or the approval of the budget will be decided on by a majority of
    the Board members. The parent companies will share equally the voting rights in the
    joint venture and will therefore have joint control over the joint venture.
7.  The parent companies made the necessary investment in terms of capital, staff and
    appropriate business and administrative structure and organisation, so that the joint
    venture operates independently of its shareholders. A General Manager, to be jointly
    appointed by the parent companies, will have responsibility for the day to day
    management of the joint venture. These requirements also constitute conditions
    precedent for the issuance by the Bank of Greece of the relevant licence for the
    establishment and operation of a bank. Moreover, although the joint venture will
    concentrate its activities on providing consumer financing for the purchase of cars,
    motorcycles and leisure boats, it will also provide other banking services which it is
    under an obligation to provide under Greek law. The joint venture will therefore have
    financial and operational autonomy.
8.  The creation of the joint venture will not lead to the co-ordination of the competitive
    behaviour of the parent companies. The parent companies are not direct or indirect
    competitors, since Inchcape Holdings is not engaged in the provision of consumer
    financing services.
9.  Accordingly, the notified concentration will lead to the creation of a full-function joint
    venture between Inchcape Holdings and EFG Eurobank.
                                                 2

III. Community dimension
10. The notified concentration has Community dimension in accordance with Article 1(2)
     of the Council Regulation. The combined aggregate world-wide turnover of the two
     undertakings concerned is more than MEUR 5 000. The aggregate Community-wide
     turnover of each of the two undertakings concerned is more than MEUR 250.
     Moreover, none of the undertakings concerned achieve more than two-thirds of its
     aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
IV. Relevant markets
     Product markets
11. The relevant product market which is affected by the creation of the joint venture is
     that of consumer financing, which forms part of the much wider market for the
     provision of banking and other credit services. Consumer financing means the
     provision of personal loans and other forms of credit to individuals intended to finance
     the purchase of consumer goods, usually motor vehicles and household equipment.
12. Credit to individuals for the purchase of consumer goods may take several forms such
     as consumer (or personal) loans, the use of credit cards, occasional overdraft facilities
     and credit directly by commercial undertakings through credit sales. One can therefore
     distinguish two distinct consumer financing markets, depending on the means the
     credit is put at the disposal of the purchaser: the banking consumer finance sector,
     encompassing those forms of credit services that can be only offered by banks under
     the Act n° 2286/28.1.1994 of the Governor of the Bank of Greece, and the non-banking
     consumer financing sector, which comprises credit facilities that can be put forward by
     non-banking institutions, including the sellers of the consumer goods themselves (i.e.,
     in the form of credit sales). However, it is not required to precisely delineate the
     boundaries of substitution and competition between those two alternatives, as under
     either market definition the operation is not likely to raise serious doubts as to its
     compatibility with the common market.
     Geographic markets
13. The joint venture will be active in the provision of consumer financing and other
     banking services exclusively in Greece. The relevant geographic market for the
     provision of banking services to individuals has been considered by the Commission as
     being national (cases IV/M.850 - Fortis/MeesPierson; IV/M.907 – Agos Itafinco). The
     relevant geographic market for the assessment of the present concentration is national.
V.   Competitive assessment
14. The notified concentration does not give rise to any affected markets. EFG Eurobank’s
     market shares in Greece are approximately [%]1 and [%]2 in terms of the total
     consumer finance market and the banking consumer finance market, respectively. EFG
     Eurobank’s market share calculation also reflects the consumer financing sales made
     by two banks belonging to the EFG Bank Group (i.e., Bank of Crete and Bank of
1   Business secret – between 8-13%
2   Business secret – between 10-15%
                                                 3

    Athens) as well as those consumer financing sales referred to EFG Eurobank by Tefin
    S.A. (see point 5 above).
15. In the consumer finance market in Greece, the joint venture will face competition by
    incumbent banks (i.e., National Bank: [%]; Commercial Bank: [%]; Citibank: [%];
    XiosBank: [%]; and a multitude of approximately 35 other banks accounting for the
    remaining [%] of the market), as well as by financing companies of car manufacturers
    (i.e., Fiat Credit, Firen, Serfin), newly established banks (Ford Credit, Open Bank) and
    finally consumer goods companies with own financing facilities.
VI. Ancillary restraints
16. The Shareholders Agreement provides for the following non-compete clauses:
    (1)      For an initial period of two years from the start up of the joint venture’s
             operations, EFG Eurobank undertakes not to seek to establish business
             relationships with car distributors with whom the joint venture will have
             established relationships in order to promote the granting of consumer loans for
             the purchase of their cars.
    (2)      For a period of five years from the start up of the joint venture’s operations,
             EFG Eurobank undertakes not to establish a business relationship with
             distributors with which the joint venture may have established business
             relations during the above initial two year period, or with other dealers or
             independent traders which are clients of Tefin at the time of the signing of the
             Shareholder Agreement.
17. The purpose of the first non-compete clause is to enable the joint venture during the
    two first years of its operation to approach distributors, including those who may have
    been co-operating with Tefin before, for the purpose of establishing a solid client basis
    for its autonomous and long-lasting development. The purpose of the second non-
    compete clause is to enable the joint venture to consolidate its relationships with those
    distributors which may have become its clients during the above initial two years
    period, by preventing Eurobank from approaching such distributors for the subsequent
    three years.
18. According to the notifying parties, the non-compete clauses imposed on one of the
    parents are necessary and aimed to encourage and assist the autonomous and
    independent development of the joint venture in the relevant market and to ensure its
    viability during an initial period after the start up of its operations. A five-year period
    may be justified by the need to protect one parent’s investment in the joint venture, by
    preventing the other parent from taking advantage of its privileged access to know-how
    or goodwill generated by the joint venture itself.
19. As to their effect on competition, these restraints have a limited impact as they concern
    only one segment of the relevant market that is, the car segment. Furthermore, the joint
    venture will, in any case, face strong competition by other banks which are already
    active or may become active in this market. These non-compete clauses are directly
    related to, and necessary for, the implementation of the joint venture and may therefore
    be considered as ancillary to the concentration.
                                                   4

VII. Conclusion
20. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
     Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                    For the Commission,
                                                    (signed : Hans Van Den Broek
                                                    Member of the Commission)
                                              5
