                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                      Brussels, 07.06.1999
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                           MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                        ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
 In the published version of this decision, some
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article                     To the notifying party
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shownSirs,
Dear      thus […]. Where possible the information
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.
Subject: Case No IV/M. 1498 – AEGON/TRANSAMERICA
             Notification of 30.04.1999 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation N/ 4064/89
1.      On 30.04.1999 the Commissionreceived a notification of a proposed concentration
        pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/891 by which AEGON N.V.
        acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control of the whole
        of Transamerica Corporation.
2.      After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
        operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
        raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
        functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.      THE PARTIES' ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
3.      AEGON provides life and non life insurance, pension products as well as other financial
        services. Transamerica Corporation is a financial services organisation which engages
        primarily through its subsidiaries in life insurance, reinsurance, commercial lending,
        leasing and real state services, mainly in the USA. Transamerica Corporation is not
        involved in the marketing of life and non-life and pension products in the European Union.
        The two main activities in which Transamerica Corporation is active in the European
        Union are commercial lending and leasing of trailers and marine containers.
1    OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p.1 ; corrected version OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p.13, as last amended by Regulation (EC)
     No 1310/97, OJ L 180, 9.9.1997, p.1, corrigendum in OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p.17.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

4.   On 18 February 1999 AEGON and Transamerica Corporation signed the Merger
     Agreement providing for AEGON’s acquisition of all of Transamerica’s outstanding
     common stock for a combination of cash and AEGON stock. The operation is expected to
     close during the summer of 1999.
II.  COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.   AEGON and Transamerica Corporation have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover
     in excess of EURO 5,000 million (AEGON, EURO 12,092 million; and Transamerica
     Corporation, EURO 5,734 million). Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in
     excess of EURO 250 million (AEGON, EURO […] million; and Transamerica
     Corporation, EURO […] million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
     aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified
     operation therefore has a Community dimension, but does not constitute a cooperation case
     under the EEA Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
III.  COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
     A. Relevant product markets
6.   The notifying party states that there are relevant product markets for non-life insurance,
     life insurance and pensions, commercial lending, leasing and, marginally, other financial
     services provided mainly for AEGON including saving related, asset management,
     investment banking and other. However, it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant
     product markets because, in all alternative market definitions considered, effective
     competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
     area.
     B. Relevant geographic markets
7.   The notifying party states that the relevant geographic markets are national (insurance to
     individuals and retail banking related services), European-wide (trailer leasing and services
     provided to corporate clients) and global (re-insurance and all subsegments of marine
     container operating leasing). It is not necessary to further delineate the relevant geographic
     markets because, in all alternative geographic market definitions considered, effective
     competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
     area.
     C. Assessment
8.   AEGON operates mainly in The Netherlands with market shares for life insurance of [less
     than 15%]. For non-life insurance subsegments, market shares are below 10%. AEGON
     operates, to a minor extent, in the UK through its affiliate Scottish Equitable and in a
     number of other Member States.
9.   Even if leased containers/trailers were to be considered as a separate market from owned
     containers/trailers, Transamerica Corporation would have a market share of [less than
     30%] in the segment for dry freight special marine container operating-leasing.
     Transamerica Corporation has a negligible presence in lending business in the UK. The
     operations of the two companies are geographically complementary in Europe, the main
     impact of the merger will be to provide AEGON with a greater presence in the United
                                                2

    States where the new group becomes the second largest life reinsurer and the third largest
    direct life insurer. Due to the companies’ unrelated product lines in Europe, the merger will
    not change any market shares in the relevant product markets in Europe.
10. Consequently, the proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant
    position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the
    EEA or any substantial part of that area.
IV. CONCLUSION
11. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                      For the Commission,
                                                3
