                          COMMISSION OF THE EURPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 19.02.1999
    In the published version of this decision, some                            PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                       MERGER PROCEDURE
    other confidential information. The omissions are                     ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
    shown thus [… ]. Where possible the information
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
    general description.
                                                                         To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M.1419-COFINOGA/BNP
              Notification of 20.01.1999 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation N/4064/89
1.      On 20.01.1999, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
        pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 1 by which Banque
        Nationale de Paris S.A (BNP) and Groupe Cofinoga (cofinoga) controlled by Galeries
        Lafayette acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation joint control
        of Creation Financial services Limited by way of purchase of shares from the Sears Group.
2.      On 15.01.1999 The Commission granted the parties a derogation from the obligation to
        suspend the concentration, imposed by Article 7(1) of Council Regulation No. 4064/89
        (the Merger Regulation) pursuant to Article 7(4) of the said Regulation.
3.      After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
        operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious doubts
        as to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
        Agreement.
     THE PARTIES' ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
4.      Cofinoga is the leading issuer of private label credit cards (or store cards) in France and has
        significant other business activities in the consumer credit sector involving personal loans
        and other financial products. It operates to a minor scale in Belgium, Italy, Spain, and
        Portugal. It has no presence or operations in the United Kingdom. BNP is a universal bank
1    OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p.1 ; corrected version OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p.13, as last amended by Regulation (EC)
     No 1310/97, OJ L 180, 9.9.1997, p.1, corrigendum in OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p.17.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

    based in France. It has no retail operations in the United Kingdom (apart from private
    banking for high net worth individuals).
5.  Creation’s principal business is the provision of consumer credit by means of storecards for
    customers of its retailer clients. Creation currently provides storecards services to the six
    Sears’ clothing chains, to Selfridges and other retailers. Sears estimates that non-group
    clients now represents approximately half of Creation’s business. Creation also promotes
    accident, sickness and unemployment insurance (ASU) under arrangement with insurers and
    unsecured term loans under agreement with a financial institution. It receives commissions
    under these arrangements.
6.  Creation has been jointly and severally acquired by Cofinoga and BNP from Sears Plc.
    Since the conclusion of the agreement the parties have decided that each of them will
    acquire 50% of the issued share capital of Creation on completion. A simple majority is
    required to effect decisions in respect of the operation of Creation and therefore neither
    party will have sole control of the joint venture. Creation will be jointly controlled by BNP
    and Cofinoga. Furthermore, the joint venture will perform on a lasting basis all the
    functions of an autonomous economic entity. Thus, the transaction constitutes a
    concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Regulation.
   COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.  Undertakings BNP, Cofinoga and Creation have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover
    in excess of EUR 5,000 million (BNP, EUR 23,053 million; Cofinoga EUR 599 and
    Creation EUR 46 million). Two of them have a Community-wide turnover in excess of
    ECU 250 million (BNP, EUR 17,452; and Cofinoga EUR 599 million), but they do not
    achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and
    the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension, but
    does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement, pursuant to Article 57
    of that Agreement.
   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
   Relevant product market
8.  Storecards constitute a segment in the wider consumer credit market. Consumers regard
    retailer storecards as in competition with credit cards, bank loans and agreed overdrafts as a
    source of consumer credit. However, it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant
    product markets because, in all alternative market definitions considered, effective
    competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
    area.
   Relevant geographic market
9.  The notifying parties state that the relevant geographic market is national. This conclusion is
    supported by the fact that credit and storecards are heavily regulated by consumer credit
    and consumer protection legislation in each Member State. Storecards are only accepted in
    the outlets of client retailers. However, it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant
    geographic markets because, in all alternative geographic market definitions considered, effective
    competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
                                                 2

    Assessment
10.  Neither Cofinoga nor BNP have any operations in the UK consumer credit segment.
     Creation’s market share based on outstanding credit and storecards amounts to [less than
     5] %. Based on the total number of cards Creation’s market share amounts to [less than
     5] %. Turning to storecards alone, Creation’s share of the number of cards would be [less
     than 5] % and [less than 5] % of total storecard debt. The leading storecard operators in the
     UK include Marks & Spencer, Kingfisher (B1Q, Woolworth, Comet, and Superdrug)
     House of Fraser, etc.
11.  In view of the market position of the parties to the concentration, it appears that the notified
     operation will have no impact on competition in the EEA. Consequently, the proposed
     concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which
     effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of
     that area.
    ANCILLARY RESTRICTIONS
12.  The non-compete restrictions accepted by the vendor are set out in clause 10.3 to 10.9 of
     the Sale and Purchase Agreement. They provide for 3-year non-compete restriction limited
     to the business of Creation and its geographic area of operations, anti-avoidance provisions,
     extension of application to all members of the Sears group. Rights of first refusal in the case
     of disposals following a larger acquisition are granted. Further, Clause 10.7 leaves out
     Freemans but if Freemans (a chain owned by Sears) disposes its credit facility business it
     will give Creation a reasonable an exclusive right of first refusal to acquire that business or
     provide such services to Freemans. Sears established Creation and has owned it for nearly
     25 years. Sears has detailed knowledge of all know-how procured by Creation as to the
     operation of retailer linked financial services. In these circumstances the present non-
     compete restrictions could be considered as ancillary.
13.  Sears Clothing entered into the Sears Clothing Agreement with Creation. The restrictions
     relating the Sears Clothing Agreement are on exclusivity and on scope. The exclusivity
     obligations are set out in Clauses 2.1, 7.2 and 7.3 whereby Creation is the exclusive
     provider of the defined facilities to Sears Clothing. The anti-avoidance provisions of Clause
     10.5 and 10.9 of the Sale and Purchase agreement are of application. The Sears Clothing
     Agreement is terminable by either party by twelve months notice on or after the fifth
     anniversary of the agreement, i.e.[… ]. It could be renewed into a further five-year period.
14.  This apparent exclusivity is no more than a reflection of commercial reality. The relationship
     between retailers and storecard issuers is such that it is only commercially practicable for
     retailers to endorse a storecard issued by one storecard issuer. It is however standard in
     such agreements to provide that the retailer is free to accept MasterCard and Visa branded
     debit and payment cards and in some cases charge cards.
15.  The fashion chains of Sears Clothing are at present the core retail business of Sears and
     Creations’ business with those chains represents approximately half of its business. The
     Commission considers the above mentioned period of the first five years sufficient to
     protect the interests of the joint venture in the present circumstances and, therefore declares
     the agreement ancilliary for the said period.
                                                   3

    CONCLUSION
16.  For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
     and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
     (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                      For the Commission,
                                              4
