                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                         Brussels, 26.02.1999
                                                                         SG (99)D/1466
                                                                                PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                             MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                        To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M.1408-HALIFAX/CETELEM
              Notification of 1.02.1999 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation N/4064/89
1. On 1.02.1999, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
     pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 1 by which Halifax Plc
     (Halifax) and Cetelem SA (Cetelem) controlled by Paribas acquire within the meaning of
     Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation joint control of Harry Dawn Limited (the joint
     venture), a newly created company.
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
     operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
     doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of the
     EEA Agreement.
     THE PARTIES' ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
3. Halifax’s main activity is retail banking within the United Kingdom. In a minor scale, it
     carries on retail banking activities in Spain and insurance activities in Luxembourg.
4. Paribas, the banking and financial services group, is the ultimate holding company of
     Cetelem, a company active mainly in France but also in Belgium, Netherlands, Italy Spain
     and Portugal. Cetelem’s principal activities are in the provision of credit to individuals
1    OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p.1 ; corrected version OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p.13, as last amended by Regulation
     (EC) No 1310/97, OJ L 180, 9.9.1997, p.1, corrigendum in OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p.17.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

   (mainly consumer loans for household equipment). It also provides finance leases,
   operating leases and home loans.
5. The primary purpose of the joint venture is to provide consumer credit and related
   insurance products to individuals in the UK. It will focus its activity in sub-prime
   customers and point-of-sale credit to customers of retailers. Halifax is not present in
   these segments. As a result the parties will be able to offer financial products in a
   segment of the UK consumer credit market which neither presently offers.
6. Halifax and Cetelem will each hold 50% of the shares of the joint venture and will each
   nominate three directors. Resolutions of the board concerning important matters will
   require de votes of both parties. The joint venture will have its own management and
   staff and will be sufficiently funded. It will be provided with access to appropriate
   technology and will offer products, which are separate from those of its parents.
   Furthermore, the joint venture will perform on a lasting basis all the functions of an
   autonomous economic entity. Thus, the transaction constitutes a concentration within the
   meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Regulation.
   COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7. Halifax and Paribas have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of EURO
   5,000 million (Halifax, EURO 11,940 million; Paribas EURO 19,476). Both of them have
   a Community-wide turnover in excess of ECU 250 million (Halifax, EURO 11,940
   million; and Paribas EURO 16,324 million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds
   of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
   The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension, but does not constitute a
   Co-operation case under the EEA Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
   Relevant product market
8. The joint venture will operate in several sub-segments of the provision of consumer
   credit in the United Kingdom, in particular unsecured loans to sub-prime customers;
   point-of-sale credit to customers of retailers; Credit and payment cards and ATM
   services and also associated insurance services for customers of the joint venture. The
   consumer credit is part of a wider sector of credit to particulars (see Case IV/M.907
   Agos/Itafinco). However, it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant product
   markets because, in all alternative market definitions considered, effective competition
   would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
   Relevant geographic market
9. The notifying parties state that the relevant geographic market is the United Kingdom. At
   the present stage the retail banking and related sectors, as the consumer credit, are
   national in scope. However, it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant geographic
   markets because, in all alternative geographic market definitions considered, effective
   competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
   area.
   Assessment
                                               2

10. As a result of the joint venture, the parties will be able to offer financial products in the UK
    which neither presently offers. Cetelem does not trade in the United Kingdom. Halifax is
    engaged in retail banking activities including the provision of credit to prime borrowers.
    Halifax has no experience in the provision of sub-prime and point -of- sale products. Although
    the joint venture will not be offering secured personal loans, it will be competing directly in
    that segment with finance houses, many of which offer secured personal loans, particularly to
    sub-prime customers. The five largest competitors in these segments are First National Bank,
    HFC/Beneficial Bank, Lombar Direct, GE Capital and Capital Bank.
11. In view of the market position of the parties to the concentration, it appears that the
    notified operation will have no impact on competition in the EEA. Consequently, the
    proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of
    which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial
    part of that area.
    ANCILLARY RESTRICTIONS
12. Clause 4(3) describes the scope of the joint venture’s activities. The joint venture will not
    be permitted without the consent of the parents to offer the products which are the
    current principal activity of Halifax namely: loans secured by real property and retail
    banking activities requiring a license under the UK banking legislation. In addition, the
    joint venture will not be permitted without the permission of the parent companies to
    offer point of sale loans for passenger cars or light commercial vehicles.
13. Clause 13(2) provides the joint venture with the exclusive right to establish relations with
    consumers through any Utility company in the UK for the provision of point-of-sale
    consumer credit to the customers of that Utility, except in the case the Utility refuses to
    deal with the joint venture. The withdrawal of the parent undertakings from offering such
    products is necessary to provide the joint venture with a viable business and to ensure a
    separation of functions.
14. Under Clause 17, each of the parent undertakings agrees not to compete with the joint
    venture. Under Clause 17(1) each parent agrees not to establish relationships with
    customers through any retailer in the UK for the provision of consumer credit. Clause
    17(2) requires Halifax not to supply details of sub-prime customers from its database to
    any entity other than the joint venture. Halifax will not introduce sub-prime customers to
    a third party. Under Clause 17(3)(d) Halifax will be entitled to continue to make
    arrangements with employers for the provision of consumer credit to employees.
15. The above provisions are necessary to delineate the scope of activities to ensure a
    separation of functions between the joint venture and its parents. Also to ensure a viable
    business for the joint venture and to protect the investment made by each parent. The
    Commission therefore declares these provisions ancillary to the concentration.
                                                  3

    CONCLUSION
16. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the
    EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                         For the Commission,
                                            4
