                                                                                              Brussels 11.11.1991
                                                                             PUBLIC        VERSION
                                                                           MERGER PROCEDURE -
                                                                           Article 6(1)b decision
                                                                       Registered with advice of delivery
                                                                       To : Notifying parties
 Subject : Case No. IV/M.141 - UAP/TRANSATLANTIC/SUN LIFE
                      Your notification of 07.10.91 pursuant to Article 4 of
                      Council Regulation 4064/89
 1. The above-mentioned operation concerns the combination of
       shareholdings held by Société Centrale Union des Assurances
       de         Paris               ("UAP")              and         Transatlantic                Holding               Plc
       ("Transatlantic") in Sun Life Plc ("Sun Life").
 2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has
       concluded that the notified operation falls within the scope
       of application of Council Regulation No. 4064/89 and does not
       raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
       market.
 THE PARTIES
 3. UAP is a major composite French insurance group, engaged
       principally in life and non-life insurance and re-insurance.
       It is also engaged in banking, in particular through its
       wholly owned subsidiary, Banque Worms.
 4. Transatlantic is a UK holding company engaged in strategic
       investments in the insurance, real estate and financial
       service sectors. It is controlled by the Liberty Life Group
       which is a South African based insurance and investment
       financial services group.
 5. Sun Life is the U.K. holding company of the Sun Life Group of
       companies whose principal activity is the undertaking of
       long-term insurance business, namely life insurance.
                                             Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
  Telephone: direct line 29..... exchange 299.11.11 - Telex COMEU B 21822 - Telegraphic address COMEUR Brussels telefax 29.......

                              - 2 -
THE AGREEMENT
6. Agreements made on 20 September 1991 provide for the three
   main following transactions:
   a) UAP and Transatlantic will each transfer their existing
       27.7% shareholding stakes in Sun Life to Rockleigh
       Corporation Plc ("Rockleigh"), a new holding company. In
       return, and to ensure that Rockleigh will be jointly
       controlled, UAP and Transatlantic will be allotted an
       equal number of voting right shares in Rockleigh ("A"
       shares to UAP and "B" shares to Transatlantic).
   b) Rockleigh has acquired from a third party (Sun Alliance
       Group Plc) shares representing 4.5% of the equity of Sun
       Life. To finance this acquisition, UAP and Transatlantic
       will both subscribe for new shares in Rockleigh (either A
       or B).
   c) As a separate but linked transaction, UAP will acquire a
       16.8% effective shareholding in Transatlantic which will,
       however, continue to be controlled by Liberty Life.
JOINT CONTROL
7. Rockleigh is a holding company formed with the purpose of
   owning and managing    the joint investment of both parent
   companies. Each of the parent companies will have the same
   number of shares with voting rights and will appoint the same
   number of directors to the board; thus all decisions will
   require the consent of both parent companies.
8. Rockleigh is, therefore, the vehicle through which UAP and
   Transatlantic will jointly control Sun Life. It will allow
   them to develop a common policy towards Sun Life.          It
   introduces a complete departure from the previous situation
   in which UAP and Transatlantic, although each holding 27.7%
   of the equity of Sun Life, had no intention of exercising
   joint control, nor did they organise any mechanism designed
   to achieve this end. Transatlantic bought itself into Sun
   Life in the early 1980s. Its stake was considered as hostile
   by the Sun Life board at that time. The acquisition of a
   shareholding in Sun Life by UAP can be seen as a direct
   result of the rejection of a proposed share swap with UAP,
   which Transatlantic and other shareholders successfully
   opposed.
9. Rockleigh will own a majority stake in Sun Life. At the date
   of the agreement, it amounts         59.9%, representing the
   existing 27.7% stake in Sun Life held by each parent company
   and transferred to Rockleigh, plus 4.5% acquired from Sun
   Alliance.     Furthermore, according to       the agreement,
   Transatlantic and UAP shall each appoint three directors of
   Sun Life    out of a total of 14 members and they will be
   entitled to appoint Sun Life's chairman, who is responsible
   for the operational management of the company.
10. It follows that, through Rockleigh, Sun Life will be jointly
    controlled by UAP and Transatlantic and will be a joint
    venture within the meaning of Article 3 of the Merger
    Regulation.

                              - 3 -
CONCENTRATIVE JOINT VENTURE
11. Sun Life will continue to be a full-function autonomous
    economic entity. It will continue to act independently on
    the insurance markets, where it is already active.
12. A geographical overlap between the activities        of both
    parents (Transatlantic and UAP) as well as Sun Life, could
    theoretically occur. Nevertheless, on the basis of several
    factual elements it    is   reasonable to assume that there
    will not be coordination of competitive behaviour between
    the three undertakings.
13. As far as re-insurance is concerned, business is carried out
    at a worldwide level.     An overlap may    therefore occur,
    since the three undertakings, like almost every insurance
    company, are present on this market.      Nevertheless, the
    level of activities of Sun Life and of Liberty Life are
    negligible.   Sun Life represents 0.007% and Liberty Life
    about 0.016% of the worldwide market (1990 re-insurance
    premium income was about 5.5 MECU and 13 MECU respectively).
    The activities of Liberty Life were conducted almost
    exclusively in South Africa. UAP has a slightly larger
    market share, but this is still only 2.4.% of the worldwide
    market.
14. As far as the life insurance sector is concerned, at present
    the relevant geographical markets in this sector seem to be
    national (see paragraph 21). Until now, the geographical
    scope of activity of the undertakings concerned is the
    following:
    - Sun Life is only active in the UK,  where its market share
       is 3%;
    - Transatlantic as well as the Liberty Life Group have no
       activity in the insurance sector in the Community;
    - UAP is not active in the UK at all in the life sector,
       and only on a very limited scale in the non-life sector.
15. Despite this present pattern of activities, taking into
    account that the markets concerned might become more open to
    intra-Community competition in the foreseeable future, the
    possible entrance of each undertaking concerned into the
    markets on which the others are active has to be considered:
-   Liberty Life (parent company of Transatlantic) is active in
    the life insurance sector in South Africa, which is a market
    widely separated from that of the Community. Transatlantic
    is a holding company for all Liberty Life investment
    activities outside South Africa. Sun Life represents its
    sole investment inside the Community.      In view of these
    factual elements, Transatlantic cannot be considered as a
    potential entrant to Community markets.
-   UAP is developing a strategy to become a strong player at
    Community level. It has undertaken a number of acquisitions
    of insurance companies in Member States other than France.
     In particular the joint control taken of Sun Life is to be
    seen in this context.     These acquisitions underline the

                              - 4 -
    difficulties encountered by any insurance company when
    entering a market on their own.       Structural barriers to
    entry are high; in particular the setting up of complete
    distribution channels in the U.K. could take a long time and
    would be costly. Therefore it does not seem reasonable to
    expect the entry of UAP on the British market other than by
    virtue ot its investment in Sun Life.
-   Sun Life would encounter the same difficulties in attempting
    to enter Community markets outside the U.K. Therefore the
    same conclusion applies to it.
16. In view of the agreement         between    the   two parent
    companies, the risk of a coordination of the competitive
    behaviour between UAP and Sun Life is also excluded in
    consideration of the role UAP is in a position to     play in
    the operational management of Sun Life.
    Although, through Rockleigh, UAP and Transatlantic will have
    joint control over Sun Life, each of them may initiate
    further purchases of shares in Sun Life. The shares thus
    purchased will be represented by the issue of Rockleigh "C"
    shares which will give no voting rights in Rockleigh.
    Nevertheless, the holder of the greater number of "C" shares
    (and in the case of an equality of "C" shareholdings, UAP)
    will be entitled to determine the appointment of the
    chairman of Sun life.
    UAP's declared intention is to  make use of its possibilities
    to purchase "C" shares.      It  is therefore reasonable to
    expect that UAP will designate  the chairman of Sun Life and,
    therefore, play a leading role  in the operational management
    of Sun Life.
17. This expected role of UAP in the operational management of
    Sun Life is corroborated by UAP's acquisition of a 16.8%
    effective shareholding in Transatlantic. According to the
    parties, the reason for such a participation is precisely to
    give a guarantee to Transatlantic that the operational
    management of Sun Life by UAP will be conducted in a way
    which will not be to the detriment of Transatlantic's own
    interests.
18. For the above reasons, the joint venture is considered to be
    of a concentrative nature.
COMMUNITY DIMENSION
19. For the 1990 financial year, the combined aggregate
    worldwide turnover of UAP, Transatlantic and Sun Life,
    (taking into account    Article 5 paragraph      3(b) of the
    Regulation concerning the calculation       of turnover   for
    insurance undertakings), exceeded 5,000 MECU (UAP : 14,072
    MECU; Transatlantic /Liberty Life : 3,500 MECU: Sun Life
    1,465 MECU).
    The Community-wide turnover for UAP and Sun Life exceeded
    250 MECU. Each of the Sun Life and Transatlantic had more
    than two-thirds of Community-wide turnover in the UK. UAP
    does not have two-thirds of its aggregate Community-wide
    turnover within the UK.      Therefore the operation has a
    Community dimension within the meaning of Article 1(2) of
    the Merger Regulation.

                               - 5 -
COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
20. Product markets
    The only product market overlap between the parties
    concerned is in the fields of        life    insurance and re-
    insurance.     It is suggested that       there exist as many
    product markets as there are insurances for different kinds
    of risk. Thus life-insurance, each type of non-life
    insurance    (fire,    accident   etc.)     and   re-insurance,
    constitute     distinct    product markets,       since   their
    characteristics, premiums and purposes are quite distinct
    from the consumer's view point:
a)  Life insurance
    This is essentially long-term, in that usually it involves
    payment of regular premiums over a period of years; in most
    cases a policy is written in the certainty that a claim will
    subsequently     be made (on death or other maturity), and
    often involves a substantial investment element.             By
    contrast, non-life insurance is         primarily short-term,
    policies being written on an annual basis against payment
    of a single premium to cover risk which may or may not
    materialize. The main non-life categories are automobile,
    fire, general liability, and accidents.
b)  Re-insurance
    Re-insurance involves the acceptance by the re-insurer of
    part    of the risk insured by another        insurer; the re-
    insurer agrees to reimburse the primary         insurer against
    part of any sums paid out under a policy to the insured
    party. Re-insurance thus constitutes a mechanism for the
    spreading of risk between insurers.
21. Geographic markets
    a)    Life insurance
    There is no present overlap in terms of geographic market as
    far life insurance is concerned.
    While it is possible, as mentioned above, that the markets
    concerned   may    become   more   open    to   intra-Community
    competition in the foreseeable future, for a number of
    reasons, the geographic markets for life-insurance seem at
    present to be the national markets of each Member State:
    - Distribution channels vary between Member States. For
       example the main distribution channel in the UK is via
       brokers (44%) whereas in France it is via banks (32%); in
       the UK only 3% is channelled through banks, and in France
       only 26% through brokers.
    - Consumer attitudes to life insurance vary between Member
       States.    For example     in   the UK life insurance is
       regularly utilised to supplement pension arrangements and
       in conjunction with mortgages, whereas this is not the
       case in France, and this is reflected in the fact that
       life premiums, in the UK, as expressed as a percentage of
       GDP,   are more than double whose in France (6.53% as
       against 3.2%).

                              - 6 -
    - Public supervision and regulation of markets differ.
       Freedom to establish and provide cross-border services has
       only been established in the non-life sector with regard
       to large risks, and that only since November, 1990.
       The fact that for the reasons cited, life insurance
       markets at the moment retain many national characteristics
       means not only that it is difficult to supply services
       transnationally, but equally that organic growth through
       the establishment of local branches or subsidiaries is
       likely to be slow, particularly given the need to
       establish a reputation and to develop a portfolio of
       products tailored to the requirements of the local
       marketplace, and to develop an infrastructure for retail
       distribution.
    b)     Re-insurance
    Since no policies are sold to the public, re-insurance being
    traded between industry specialists, regulatory controls by
    national authorities tend to be much less extensive, and
    business is carried out     at a worldwide level.
Assessment
22. In view of the above, there is no overlap between the
    activities of the companies concerned in the life insurance
    sector since Sun Life is active only in the UK, a market in
    which UAP is not present; Transatlantic as well as the
    Liberty Life Group has no activity at all in the insurance
    sector in the Community. In the field of re-insurance the
    parties' shares of the worldwide market are minimal (a
    fraction of one per cent for each of Sun Life and the parent
    company of Transatlantic (Liberty Life Group) and       about
    2.4% for UAP). Therefore concerns about horizontal overlap
    do not arise; and even if UAP's re-insurance business were
    used to diversify risk and enable further direct insurance
    to be written, the market shares involved are so small as
    to preclude concern about "vertical" links.
23. Furthermore, the strengthening of Sun Life by virtue of the
    large resources of UAP and Transatlantic gives no cause for
    concern in view of the low market shares of Sun Life, and
    the presence      of other      strong competitors such as
    Prudential Corporation,     Commercial Union, and so on.
24. For the above reasons the Commission has decided not to
    oppose the notified concentration and to declare it
    compatible with the common market. This decision is adopted
    in application of Article 6(1)b of Council Regulation No.
    4064/89.
                                   For the Commission,
TEXTE RECONSTITUÉ ÉLECTRONIQUEMENT / ELECTRONICALLY RE-CREATED
             TEXT / ELEKTRONISCH NACHGEBILDETER TEXT
