                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 22/07/1999
    In the published version of this decision, some                         PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to
    Article 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No
    4064/89 concerning non-disclosure of business                         MERGER PROCEDURE
    secrets and other confidential information. The                     ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
    omissions are shown thus […]. Where possible
    the information omitted has been replaced by
                                                                     To the notifying party
    ranges of figures or a general description.
6XEMHFW &DVH1R,90±*HQHUDO0RWRUV$FFHSWDQFH&RUSRUDWLRQ$$6
             Notification of 18.6.1999 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation N/ 4064/89
1.     On 18.6.1999, the Commission received the notification of a proposed operation by
       which General Motors Acceptance Corporation (“GMAC”) will acquire sole control
       over ARRIVA Automotive Solutions Limited (“AAS”).
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
       raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the functioning
       of the EEA Agreement.
,7KHSDUWLHVDQGWKHRSHUDWLRQ
3.     GMAC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of General Motors Corporation (“GM”), is active
       in offering a wide variety of automotive financial services throughout the world.
4.     AAS, the target company, is active in contract vehicle leasing and fleet management in
       the U.K. It is a subsidiary of ARRIVA, plc (“ARRIVA”), which has a range of
       activities in the transportation sector, mainly in the United Kingdom, but also in
       Holland and Denmark.
5.     The proposed operation consists of the acquisition by GMAC of sole control over
       AAS, through the acquisition of the totality of the shareholdings in AAS from
       ARRIVA.
,,&RQFHQWUDWLRQRID&RPPXQLW\'LPHQVLRQ
6.     The operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3.1.b. of the
       Merger Regulation.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

7.    GM and AAS have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of EUR1.
      5,000 million (GM, EUR 143,891 million; AAS, EUR 463.8 million). Each of them
      has a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (GM, EUR 26,619
      million; AAS, EUR 463.8 million). GM and AAS do not both achieve more than two-
      thirds of their respective aggregate Community-wide turnovers within one and the same
      Member State. The notified operation has, therefore, a Community dimension.
,,,$VVHVVPHQW
8.    AAS operates in the area of contract vehicle hire and leasing and the related area of
      fleet management in the U.K. As neither GMAC itself, nor its parent company, GM,
      are active in either of these areas, the operation results in no horizontal overlap. Nor
      does the operation give rise to any vertically affected markets, or present any other
      competition concerns.
9.    Hence, it is considered that the proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a
      dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly
      impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
,9$QFLOODU\5HVWUDLQWV
10. Under clause 14.1.1 of the Share Sale Agreement, ARRIVA, the vendor, convenants
      with GMAC that neither it nor any other member of the ARRIVA Group shall, for a
      period of three years from completion be concerned in any business carrying on
      business in the U.K. which is competitive with any of the businesses carried out by
      AAS or its subsidiaries at completion. This non-compete obligation is intended to
      guarantee the acquirer the full value of the assets transferred, which in this particular
      operation include goodwill and know-how. As such, the Commission considers the
      clause directly related and necessary to the implementation of the concentration.
11. Under clauses 14.1.2,14.1.3, and 14.1.4, ARRIVA further covenants that neither it nor
      any other member of the ARRIVA Group shall, for a period of three years from
      completion, a) canvass or solicit for (providing customers with) similar goods or
      services to those being provided by AAS or its subsidiaries at completion, except on
      behalf of AAS, b) induce or attempt to induce any supplier of AAS or its subsidiaries,
      other than a member of the ARRIVA Group to cease to supply, or to restrict or vary the
      terms of supply, to that company, c) induce or attempt to induce any director or
      employee of AAS, or any of its subsidiaries, to leave the employment of that company.
      The Commission considers that these clauses can also be considered directly related to
      and necessary to the implementation of the concentration, in the same context of the
      protection of the full value of the assets (including goodwill and know-how)
      transferred.
1     Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the
      Commission Notice on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the
      extent that figures include turnover for the period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated
      on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into EUR on a one-for-one
      basis.
                                                 2

12. Similarly, clause 14.5, in which ARRIVA further covenants with GMAC that it, the
    vendor, shall not trade under or by reference to any of the trade names currently or
    formerly used by AAS or its subsidiaries, is considered by the Commission necessary
    to protect the full-value of these trade-marks.
13. Under clause 1 of the Agreed Draft Supply Agreement, for a period of two years from
    the date of completion of the Share Sale Agreement, GMAC will procure that AAS will
    purchase […] vehicles per year from ARRIVA Motor Retail, provided that GMAC
    remains in the contract hire business in the U.K. and ARRIVA Motor Retail remains a
    subsidiary of ARRIVA. Prices shall be agreed on an arm’s length basis of willing buyer
    and willing seller, for similar volumes of cars to a fleet car buyer on similar standards
    of service. According to GMAC, the amount of vehicles concerned constitutes less than
    a third of the AAS’ annual purchase and the purpose of the clause is to provide
    continuity of the supply of cars by an existing supplier to the business being transferred
    for a period of two years. In these circumstances, the Commission can consider the
    clause directly related and necessary to the implementation of the concentration.
9     &21&/86,21
14. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                       For the Commission,
                                               3
