                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 26.08.1999
    In the published version of this decision, some                         PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                     MERGER PROCEDURE
    other confidential information. The omissions are                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
    shown thus […]. Where possible the information
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
    general description.
                                                                     To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M.1660 – Bank of New York/Royal Bank of Scotland/RBSI
             Security Services
             Notification of 29.07.1999 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/891
1. On 29.07.1999, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
     pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 of the acquisition by the
     undertaking, BNY International Financing Corporation (“BNY”), belonging to the Bank
     of New York Company, Inc., (“BNY Group”) of a 30% shareholding in RBSI Security
     Services (Holdings) Limited (“Security Services”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the
     Royal Bank of Scotland International (Holdings) Limited (“RBSI Holdings”), an indirect
     wholly-owned subsidiary of the Royal Bank of Scotland Group, plc (“RBS”). Through
     the arrangements for decision-taking, BNY will acquire joint control of Security
     Services with RBSI Holdings.
2. Following examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
     notified operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and
     does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with
     the EEA Agreement.
1 OJ L 395, 30.12.89 p.1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.09.90, p.13; Regulation as last amended by Regulation
  (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 09.07.97, p.1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.02.98, p.17).
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

I.      THE PARTIES
3.  The BNY Group provides a broad range of banking and financial services, including
    retail and corporate banking, financial market services, investment management and
    private banking, and securities services and cash processing.
4.  RBSI Holdings provide banking and other financial services (including trust, custody
    and fund administration services) in a number of off-shore jurisdictions.
5.  The activities of Security Services consist of fund administration services in Jersey and
    custodian and certain other banking services in Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man.
II.     THE OPERATION
    Joint Control
 6. Under the terms of the Shareholders’ Agreement relating to Security Services, BNY will
    be given consent rights at both the shareholder and boardroom level which extend to
    certain strategic business matters of Security Services, including the business plan and
    budget. Thus it is considered that the operation will result in Security Services being
    jointly controlled by BNY and RBSI Holdings.
    Full-function Concentrative Joint Venture
7.  After the operation Security Services will continue to operate a separate and distinct
    service to those of the RBS Group and will continue to operate in Jersey, Guernsey and
    the Isle of Man, where neither of the parent companies have operations. Furthermore,
    both parents have agreed not to compete with Security Services as regards its business
    in these islands.
8.  At an international level, only BNY will be active with the services offered by the joint
    venture company, as the Royal Bank of Scotland is selling simultaneously its subsidiary
    for this type of services, the Royal Bank of Scotland Trust Bank, to the Bank of New
    York (Case No.IV/M.1618-Bank of New York/Royal Bank of Scotland Trust Bank).
    Thus Security Services is considered to constitute a concentrative full-function joint
    venture.
III. CONCENTRATION OF A COMMUNITY DIMENSION
9.  The operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3.1.b of the
    Merger Regulation.
10. The BNY Group and RBS have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of
    EUR 5,000 million (The BNY Group, EUR 5,167 million; RBS, EUR 10.926 million).
    Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (The BNY
    Group, EUR […] ; RBS, EUR 8,991 million). The BNY Group and RBS do not both
    achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnovers within one
    and the same Member State. The notified operation has, therefore, a Community
    dimension.
                                                 2

IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
11.   Security Services is not active in, and its activities do not directly affect, any Member
      State or the EEA territory. There are thus no affected markets, and the proposed joint
      venture does not raise any other competition concerns. It is thus considered that the
      operation does not result in the creation or strengthening of a dominant position.
V.     ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
12. Under clause 9.1 of the Share Sale and Purchase Agreement, the vendor, RBS,
    undertakes to BNY that it shall not, and that it shall procure that the members of the
    RBS Group shall not, for a period of […] years from completion, engage in Jersey,
    Guernsey or the Isle of Man in any of the activities carried on by the Security Services
    Group.
13. Under clause 10.4, BNY agrees to procure that for so long as any member of the BNY
    Group remains a shareholder of the Security Services Group, the Security Services
    Group shall remain the sole provider to such member and its associated companies and
    to their respective clients of the activities carried on by the Security Services Group in
    each of Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man. The notifying parties submit that this
    restriction is analogous to a non-compete provision and is within the spirit of expressing
    the lasting withdrawal of the parent, BNY, from the market assigned to the joint
    venture, since it requires BNY to use only the Security Services Group for the provision
    of such services in the countries in which the Security Services Group operates,
    meaning that BNY should not undertake such activities itself. In this context, the
    provision can be considered an integral part of the concentration.
VI.    CONCLUSION
14. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6 (1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC)
    No 4064/89.
                                                          For the Commission,
                                                   3
