                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 13.09.1999
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                        ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                     7RWKHQRWLI\LQJSDUWLHV
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M.1627 - CU ITALIA/BANCA DELLE MARCHE/JV
             Notification of 12 August 1999 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
             No 4064/89
1.     On 12 August 1999, the Commission received notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by which Commercial
       Union Italia S.p.A. (“CU Italia”), the Italian subsidiary of the insurance group CGU
       plc, and Banca delle Marche S.p.A. (“BDM”), an Italian commercial bank, intend to
       acquire joint control within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Regulation of
       Commercial Union Life S.p.A. and Commercial Union Assicurazioni S.p.A. (together
       “joint venture companies”), which are wholly-owned subsidiaries of CU Italia.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
       raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

3.   CU Italia is active in all fields of the Italian insurance market and is a wholly-owned
     subsidiary of the insurance group GCU1. The principal activities of the group are the
     transaction of all classes of general insurance and life-insurance in the United
     Kingdom, continental Europe, North America, Australia and other parts of the world.
     CGU also provides financial services related to its insurance business. According to the
     parties, CU Italia is estimated to be the 5th largest life-insurer and 25th largest general
     insurance group in Italy. Commercial Union Life S.p.A. (“CU Life”) and Commercial
     Union Assicurazioni S.p.A. (“CU Assicurazioni”) are wholly-owned subsidiaries of
     CU Italia and active on the insurance underwriting market in Italy in the field of life
     insurance and general insurance respectively.
4.   BDM is a commercial bank in Italy and the holding company of the BDM Group of
     companies, which are active in the Italian banking sector and operate mainly as savings
     banks primarily in the Italian region of Marche. According to the parties, the BDM
     ranks as the 36th largest commercial bank in Italy in its own right the BDM Group as
     the 20th largest banking group in Italy.
II.  THE OPERATION
5.   The notified operation includes several transactions. CGU Europe Division will make
     an investment through CU Italia in the share capital of BDM amounting to a
     shareholding of 9.25% in BDM. BDM will on its part acquire 0.06% of the shares in
     CGU and 50% of the related share capital of each of CU Life and CU Assicurazioni.
III. CONCENTRATION
     -RLQWFRQWURO
6.   Following the implementation of the notified transaction, CU Italia and BDM will each
     hold an equal share of 50% of the share capital of CU Life and CU Assicurazioni
     respectively. The structure of the two joint venture companies will be identical and they
     will share the same Managing Director. The members of the Board of Directors of the
     two joint venture companies will also be substantially the same.
7.   CU Italia and BDM intend to exercise influence in the 6KDUHKROGHUV¶ PHHWLQJ of the
     joint venture and through their representation in the Board of Directors. According to
     Section 3.1 of the respective Shareholders Agreement (hereafter “Shareholders
     Agreements”) CU Italia and BDM intend to confer before each shareholders’ meeting
     in order to assume as far as possible a uniform approach.
8.   The %RDUGRI'LUHFWRUV of both joint venture companies will, pursuant to Section 4.1 of
     the Shareholders Agreements, be composed of an odd number of members, from a
     minimum of five to a maximum of eleven, as resolved by the shareholders’ meeting. In
     accordance with Section 4.2 of the Shareholders Agreements, the Chairman of both
     joint venture companies will be appointed by CU Italia with BDM’s agreement and the
     remaining Directors will be appointed in equal number of CU Italia and BDM.
     Following Sections 5.1 and 5.2 of the Shareholders Agreement, the Board of Directors
     will appoint a Managing Director and/or a General Manager in charge of the ordinary
     management of the company from among one of the Directors of CU Italia. Similarly,
1   Case No.IV/M.1142, Commission decision of 6 May 1998.
                                                 2

    if a General Manager is appointed, the General Manager shall be one of the Directors
    of CU Italia or another person appointed by CU Italia.
9.  Section 4.4 of the Shareholders Agreements provides that the strategic rules for the
    joint venture companies and the related long-term planning as well as the general
    approach for staff management, issued in line with the strategic projects of the
    Commercial Union Group, will be submitted to the Board of Directors by the
    Managing Director. The Board takes decisions on these issues with the favourable vote
    of 2/3 of the Directors.
10. The Shareholders Agreements between CU Italia and BDM thus provide that the
    agreement of both CU Italia and BDM will be required for the approval of the most
    important strategic decisions concerning the joint ventures. Therefore, the joint venture
    companies will be jointly controlled by CU Italia and BDM.
    )XOOIXQFWLRQDOLW\
11. CU Life and CU Assicurazioni are pre-existing companies operating on the insurance
    market in Italy possessing the necessary authorisations and offering their policies under
    the CU trademark to their customers and providing their own underwriting. CU
    Assicurazioni distributes its policies through its own network of agents and brokers.
    Distribution of the policies of CU Life takes for most part place through other networks
    than its own network of agents. In 1998, the total premiums collected by the joint
    venture companies amounted to some 5% of the overall activities of CU Italia.
12. The Agreement for the Distribution of Insurance Products and for Cooperation
    (“Distribution Agreement”) between the parties provides that BDM grants the joint
    venture companies exclusive access to its distribution channels including banks, branches
    and financial promoters but the joint venture companies will remain free to use also other
    modes of distribution.2
13. The joint venture companies are pre-existing companies having sufficient financial and
    other resources to operate their activities on a lasting basis. CU Italia and BDM expect
    the joint venture to operate for a minimum period of ten years. On the basis of the
    foregoing, it can be concluded that the joint venture will operate on a lasting basis and
    will perform all the functions of an autonomous economic entity.
14. Thus, the notified operation is a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1) (b) of
    the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
15. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
    than EUR 5 billion (gross premium income for CGU EUR 24,812 million in 1998;
    turnover for BDM EUR 724 million in 1998)3. Each of CGU and BDM have a
    Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (gross premium income for
2   Case IV/M.707 – Toro Assicurazioni/Banca di Roma, Commission decision of 5 March 1996.
3   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Notice on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include
    turnover for the period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates
    and translated into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                     3

    CGU EUR 17,047 million in 1998; turnover for BDM EUR 724 million in 1998), but
    they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover
    within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a
    Community dimension. It does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA
    Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
9  &203(7,7,9($66(660(17
    $5HOHYDQWSURGXFWPDUNHWV
16. In the insurance sector a distinction is made between both life insurance and general
    insurance and reinsurance. Reinsurance constitutes a separate market because of its
    purpose of spreading risks between insurers. Life and non-life insurance can be divided
    into as many product markets as there are different kinds of risks covered. Their
    characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and there is typically no
    substitutability for the consumer between the different risks insured (see case
    IV/M.1172 Fortis AG/Generale Bank, case IV/M.1142 – Commercial Union/General
    Accident, case IV/M.812 – Allianz/Vereinte, case IV/M.862 – Axa/UAP).
17. For the purpose of the present case it is not, however, necessary to define a separate
    market for distribution of life and non-life insurance through banks as, even on the
    narrowest market definition, the concentration will not create or strengthen a dominant
    position in the EEA or any substantial part of it.
    %5HOHYDQWJHRJUDSKLFPDUNHW
18. The Commission has in its previous decisions found that insurance markets are
    becoming more open to intra-community competition, particularly for industrial and
    commercial policies, as a result of measures to facilitate cross-border selling. As far as
    life and non-life insurance are concerned the relevant geographical markets are national
    as a result of national distribution channels, the established market structures, fiscal
    constraints and differing regulatory systems (see case IV/M.1172 – Fortis AG/Generale
    Bank, case IV/M.759 – Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance). The markets for reinsurance are
    world wide in view of the need to pool risks on an international basis and the conduct
    of reinsurance business (see case IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP).
19. The present operation concerns joint venture companies active in the field of life and
    non-life insurance in Italy and in particular in the Marche region. It could therefore be
    argued that the relevant geographic market in the present case be defined more
    narrowly as the Marche region. The exact definition of the relevant geographic market
    can, however, be left open in the present case, since irrespective of the market
    definition chosen the concentration will not create or strengthen a dominant position in
    the EEA or any substantial part of it.
    &&RPSHWLWLYHDVVHVVPHQW
20. The economic sectors involved in the notified transaction include life and non-life
    insurance sectors. According to the notifying parties, there are no horizontal overlaps
    between the activities of CGU through its subsidiary CU Italy and BDM. BDM has
    terminated its previous bancassurance agreements with Eurovita and Carivita earlier
    this year.
                                              4

21. Insurance providers have a wide range of means available for the distribution of
     insurance products to the end customers. These include insurers’ writing direct, brokers
     and other types of insurance agents. Coverage by direct writers is being increasingly
     facilitated by new computer and electronic communication technology. In general,
     distribution networks of insurance policies are undergoing a significant degree of
     change as various banks and other financial institutions are also distributing different
     lines of insurance to personal and commercial customers.
22. The purpose of the joint venture is to strengthen the growth of the joint venture
     companies and to develop mutual synergies by combining the experience of the CU Italia
     in the provision of insurance products and the strength of the distribution network of
     BDM and of the companies of BDM group mainly located in the Marche region in Italy.
     Therefore, the impact of the present operation concentrates foremost in the Marche region
     in Italy.
23. BDM operates 235 banking outlets in Italy representing approximately 0.89% of the total
     number of 26,255 banking outlets in Italy. At the regional level BDM has 198 banking
     outlets in the Marche region amounting to 24%4 of the total number of banking outlets in
     that region. In the Lazlo, Umbria and Emilia Romagna region it has relatively minor
     presence. CU Italia has a small-scale presence in the Marche region representing 0.47%
     of the overall insurance underwriting in the region and 0.98% of the life insurance and
     0.16% of the non-life insurance in the region.5
     /LIHLQVXUDQFH
24. According to the notifying parties, the market share of CGU through CU Italia of the
     Italian life insurance market amounts to approximately 4.41%. Within CU Italia, the
     market share of CU Life on the same market amounts to approximately 0.22%. CGU is
     active in the Italian market also through CU Vita having 4.14% and CU Previdenza6
     having a 0.05% market share. The market shares of CU Italia and CU Life in the
     different life insurance markets are described in the table below.
                     Type of insurance              CU Italia            CU Life
                     Unit linked policies            13.8%                0.44%
                     Other life policies              3.5%                0.35%
                     Pension products           Not applicable       Not applicable
                  Source: notification
     1RQOLIHLQVXUDQFH
25. According to the notifying parties, the market share of CGU through CU Italia of the
     Italian total general insurance (non-life) market amounts to approximately 0.97%. CU
     Italia itself has a market share of 0.57% and CU Assicurazioni 0.38% of the Italian
4  Source: Bank of Italy.
5  The above figures represent the situation in 1996, whereby the present market shares of CU Italia are
   lower due to the termination of a bancassurance agreement with Credito Italiano in June 1999.
6  CGU acquired 66.67% holding of the former Systema Vita S.p.A. on 24 July 1998.
                                                     5

    non-life insurance market. The market shares of CU Italia and CU Assicurazioni in the
    different non-life insurance markets are described in the table below.
                  Type of insurance                CU Italia                CU
                                                                      Assicurazioni
                  Motor                              3.73%                  0%7
                  Fire                               1.16%                 0.03%
                  Accident/health                    1.22%                 0.14%
                  General Liability                  0.68%                 0.04%
                  Pecuniary loss                     0.21%                 0.01%
                  Other accident                     1.87%                 0.38%
                  Marine                             3.39%                   0%
                Source: notification
26. When considering the more narrow market of distribution of insurance products
    through banks in the Marche region, BDMA faces a number of actual and potential
    competitors in the Marche region including Banca Populare de Ancona, which the
    parties estimate to have10% of bank branches in the Marche region, Banca Populare
    dell’ Adriatico 5.4%, Cassa di Risparmio di Ascoli Piceno 5.4%, Cassa di Risparmio di
    Verona e Vicenza 5.2% and Cassa di Risparmio di Fermo 4.9% of the branches
    respectively.
27. In view of the above mentioned market shares and the number of competitors in the
    Marche region, the current operation will not create or strengthen a dominant position
    in the EEA or any substantial part of it.
9, &21&/86,21
28. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                               For the Commission,
7  At present, CU Assicurazioni is not authorised to offer motor insurance. Pursuant to the Distribution
   Agreement, however, the parties intend evaluate the opportunity for such business.
                                                     6
