                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 21.10.1999
    In the published version of this decision, some                         PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to
    Article 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No
    4064/89 concerning non-disclosure of business                         MERGER PROCEDURE
    secrets and other confidential information. The                     ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
    omissions are shown thus […]. Where possible
    the information omitted has been replaced by
                                                                     To the notifying party
    ranges of figures or a general description.
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M. 1714 - FÖRENINGSSPARBANKEN / FI-HOLDING / FIH
             Notification of 22.09.99 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 22/09/1999, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration,
       whereby the Swedish undertaking FöreningsSparbanken will acquire the Danish
       undertaking Finansieringsinstituttet for Industri og Håndværk A/S (FIH).
 I.       THE PARTIES
2.     FöreningsSparbanken is one of the largest banking groups in Sweden and it provides a
       wide range of financial services primarily in Sweden. These universal banking services
       include retail banking, Internet banking, services regarding capital markets, larger
       customers operations etc.
3.     FIH’s two main business area are corporate and investment banking in Denmark, with
       corporate banking being the most important accounting for an estimated more than 95
       % of FIH’s activities. Corporate banking includes all types of services related to
       lending to industry.
II.    THE OPERATION
4.     The transaction consists of a public tender by FI-Holding to purchase all shares in FIH.
       FI-Holding is a wholly owned Danish subsidiary of FöreningsSparbanken and has been
       established with the sole purpose of being used as a vehicle to submit the public bid.
III. CONCENTRATION
5.     The concentration consists of the acquisition by FöreningsSparbanken of control of
       FIH, by way of a public bid. Therefore, the transaction is a concentration within the
       meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

6.   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 000 million1 (FöreningsSparbanken: EUR 5 982 million; FIH: EUR 401,1
     million). Each of the parties have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250
     million2 (FöreningsSparbanken: EUR 5 875 million; FIH: EUR 401,1 million). In
     addition, they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide
     turnover within one and the same Member State. The operation therefore has a
     Community dimension, but is does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA
     Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
V.   RELEVANT MARKETS
Relevant product markets
7.   The operation involves banking services, in particular corporate and investment
     banking services. According to the parties there are no affected markets for the purpose
     of this transaction. The only overlap would be found in the area of financial services,
     since FöreningsSparbanken is the only part to offer live insurance and pensions
     savings. Financial services include banking services and other services.
8.   According to the Commissions practice3, banking and financial services may be
     divided into three main categories that can constitute separate markets: 1) retail
     banking, 2) wholesale banking4, and 3) activities related to financial markets. In
     particular the distinction between retail and corporate banking is relevant for the
     purpose of assessing market conditions.
9.   By retail banking is meant banking services to households which consist, for example,
     of deposits, lending, credit cards and mutual funds and other forms of asset
     management.
10. By wholesale or corporate banking is meant banking services to corporate clients
     which consists, for example, of deposits, lending, international payments, letters of
     credit and advice concerning mergers and acquisitions.
11. With regard to activities related to financial markets, the following activities may
     constitute distinct services markets: trading in equities, bonds, and derivatives, foreign
     exchange and money markets.
12. For the purpose of the present case, it is not necessary to define the relevant
     product/service markets, since the operation would not lead to the creation or
     strengthening of a dominant position under any possible market definition.
1  Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
   on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
   period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into
   EUR on a one-for-one basis.
2  Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
   on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
   period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into
   EUR on a one-for-one basis.
3  Case No. M.1029 – Merita/Nordbanken
4  Case No. IV/M.1340 – BNP / DRESDNER BANK – AUSTRIAN JV.
                                                      2

 Relevant geographic markets
13. According to the parties the geographical delineation of the three main markets may
     vary. The parties submit that for the purpose of the assessment of the present case,
     these markets are national.
14. The Commission has stated in previous cases, that with regard to the retail banking the
     relevant geographic market is to be considered national in scope due to the competitive
     conditions, which in individual Member States are still different due to the importance
     of local presence (network of branches). On the other hand, an increasing trend points
     towards internationalisation and the present situation may change in the longer term
     with the introduction of the single currency and new technologies, e.g. internet and
     telephone banking.
15. According to the Commissions practice, certain service segments with regard to
     wholesale/corporate banking will continue to be required and supplied at a national
     level. However, some segments of corporate banking seem to have a more international
     dimension. In earlier decisions the Commission has found that the relevant geographic
     market appears to be national for small and medium-sized corporate clients and
     international for large corporate clients5.
16. With regard to activities related to financial markets, the Commission has found
     financial services to be international in earlier decisions6 in respect to activities such as
     equity and dept issues, and international as regards money markets etc.
17. However, for the purpose of this case, it is not necessary to define the relevant
     geographic scope, because even under the narrowest market definition, the
     concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position.
VI. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
18. FöreningsSparbanken has activities within all three main services areas whereas FIH
     only operates within certain segments on the market for wholesale banking services for
     undertakings and the market concerning activities related to financial markets.
     Consequently, the transaction would only lead to an overlap in the last two markets.
     Wholesale/corporate banking
19. Almost all of FIH’s activities have as their basis a relationship to Danish customers.
     The activities appear to a very large extent confined to Denmark, and FIH acquires all
     of its turnover there. It is basically only if its activities involve financing of foreign
     subsidiaries or other activities abroad of Danish undertakings that the activities involve
     a cross border element. On the market for wholesale banking FöreningsSparbanken has
     so far not carried out any direct activities in Denmark and therefore has no turnover in
     Denmark. Approximately 97 % of FöreningsSparbankens business activities are carried
     out in Sweden. Consequently, if the geographic scope of the market is delineated as
     national, there would only be an insignificant overlap between the parties’ activities in
     this market.
5   Case No. M.1029 – Merita/Nordbanken
6   Case No. M.1029 – Merita/Nordbanken.
                                                 3

20. FöreningsSparbanken has a market share of 25 - 30 % of the wholesale banking market
     in Sweden and its position here will not be reinforced by the merger due to the lack of
     geographic overlap. FIH’s market share on the Danish market for corporate banking
     has been estimated to be around 7 % and less than 2 % on the Danish market for
     investment banking services. Therefore, if the geographic market was wider than
     national, then the parties’ combined market share would become even smaller. In
     conclusion, the concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position under
     any alternative market definition.
      Activities related to financial markets
21. As mentioned above, there is no significant geographic overlap between the parties’
     activities, if the market is defined as national in scope. FöreningsSparbanken only has a
     market share of 3-4 % in this market segment in Sweden, so if the geographic scope of
     the market is defined wider than national, the parties combined market share will be
     insignificant and does not give raise to any competition concerns.
VII. CONCLUSION
22. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
     Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                           For the Commission,
                                                 4
