                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 17.12.1999
                                                                     SG(99) D/10357-10358
    In the published version of this decision, some                         PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                     MERGER PROCEDURE
    other confidential information. The omissions are                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
    shown thus […]. Where possible the information
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
    general description.
                                                                     To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.1771 - SEDGWICK NOBLE LOWNDES/WOOLWICH
Notification of 18.11.1999 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 18 November 1999, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
       concentration arising from the creation of a joint venture between Sedgwick Noble
       Lowndes (UK) Limited and Woolwich plc.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
       doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
3.     Sedgwick Financial Services Ltd is a subsidiary of Sedgwick Noble Lowndes (UK) Ltd
       which is a subsidiary of the Sedgwick Group plc. The Sedgwick Group plc was
       acquired towards the end of 1998 by Marsh & McLennan Companies Inc. (Case No
       IV/M.1307). Marsh & McLennan is a professional service firm engaged in risk and
       insurance services, investment management and consultancy. Woolwich principally
       deals in the provision of personal financial services in the UK.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

II.  THE OPERATION
4.   Marsh & McLennan plans to sell part of its interest in Sedgwick FS to Woolwich by
     way of a business and asset sale to the proposed joint venture company. The joint
     venture will be active in the provision of independent financial advice in the UK.
5.   Woolwich’s existing Independent Financial Services subsidiary, WIFAS, will be
     subject to an ancillary restraint not to compete with the joint venture other than
     continuing to engage in business with its existing customers.
III. CONCENTRATION
6.   Sedgwick Noble UK and Woolwich (the “Shareholders”) will each have decisive
     influence over the business activities of the joint venture with each holding 50 per cent
     of the voting rights in the new joint venture company. The Board of Directors of the
     joint venture company will be comprised of six directors; three being appointed by each
     Shareholder.
7.   Furthermore, the joint venture will perform on a lasting basis all the functions of an
     autonomous economic entity. It is therefore a full function joint venture within the
     meaning of the Merger Regulation.
8.   Based on the foregoing, the Commission concludes that the operation is a concentration
     within the meaning of Article 3(1)b of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
9.   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 billion1 (Marsh & McLennan EUR 7,719.6million; Woolwich EUR
     4,051.7 million). Each of Marsh & McLennan and Woolwich have a Community-wide
     turnover in excess of EUR 250 million, but they do not each achieve more than two-
     thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member
     State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
     (a) Relevant product market
10. The notifying parties submit that the relevant product market definition is the provision
     of independent financial services, and that this constitutes a separate market from the
     provision of financial advice through tied financial brokers.
11. It is not necessary to define exactly the relevant product markets in this case because, in
     the narrowest market definition considered, effective competition would not be
     significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
1   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into
    EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                           2

    (b) Relevant geographic market
12. The notifying parties consider the market to be national and no indications to the
    contrary have been received. Financial products are offered by financial institutions
    specifically for the UK, and financial advisers are subject to UK regulation under the
    Financial Services Act 1986.
    (c) Assessment
13. On the basis of a relevant market definition of the provision of independent financial
    services in the UK, there would be no affected markets. The joint venture company
    would be the third largest company in the market with a market share of 1.5 per cent.
    WIFAS has a market share of 1.5 per cent. The largest player in the market (Bradford
    and Bingley) has a market share of 2 per cent.
14. On the basis of the foregoing, the Commission does not consider that the notified
    operation will have any material impact on competition in the EEA. Consequently, the
    proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of
    which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any
    substantial part of that area.
VI. CONCLUSION
15. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                      For the Commission,
                                                      Signed by
                                                      Mr. David Byrne
                                                      Member of the Commission
                                                3
