                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 10.12.1999
  In the published version of this decision,                                 PUBLIC VERSION
  some information has been omitted
  pursuant to Article 17(2) of Council                                    MERGER PROCEDURE
  Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 concerning                                ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
  non-disclosure of business secrets and other
  confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the
  information omitted has been replaced by
  ranges of figures or a general description.                           to the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No COMP/M.1764 – Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken/BFG Bank
             Notification of 9.11.99 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 10.11.1999, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/891, whereby the Swedish
       undertaking Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB (“SEB”) acquires control of the
       German undertaking BfG Bank AG (“BfG”).
I.     THE PARTIES
2.     SEB is active in the banking sector. The SEB group is one of the largest financial
       groups in the Nordic area. The group offers a broad range of banking and insurance
       services mainly in the Nordic countries. The main services are retail banking (also
       Internet), corporate banking and international financial products.
3.     BfG is the fifth largest private commercial bank in Germany. Its main businesses with
       basis in Germany are retail banking (also Internet), corporate banking and international
       financial products.
II.    THE OPERATION
1         OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
          Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

4.   SEB will through the proposed transaction acquire sole control of BfG by way of
     purchase of all of the shares.
III. CONCENTRATION
5.   The concentration consists of the acquisition by SEB of control of BfG by way of
     purchase of shares. Therefore, the transaction is a concentration within the meaning of
     Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 billion2 (SEB: EUR 5 938 million; BfG: EUR 2 683 million). Each of the
     undertakings have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (SEB:
     EUR 5 522 million; BfG: EUR 2 618 million). Furthermore, the parties do not achieve
     more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the
     same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension. It
     does not constitute a co-operation case pursuant to Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
V.   RELEVANT MARKETS
Relevant product markets
7.   Both SEB and BfG are full service banks offering a comprehensive range of banking
     services.
8.   According to the Commissions past practice3, banking and financial services may be
     divided into three main categories that can constitute separate markets: 1) retail
     banking, 2) corporate banking, and 3) activities related to financial markets.
9.   By retail banking is meant banking services to households which consist, for example,
     of deposits, lending, credit cards and mutual funds and other forms of asset
     management.
10. By wholesale or corporate banking is meant banking services to corporate clients
     which consists, for example, of deposits, lending, international payments, letters of
     credit and advice concerning mergers and acquisitions.
11. With regard to activities related to financial markets, the following activities may
     constitute distinct services markets: trading in equities, bonds, and derivatives, foreign
     exchange and money markets.
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into
    EUR on a one-for-one basis.
3   Case No. IV/M.1029 – Merita/Nordbanken, Case No. IV/M.1340 – BNP/Dresdner Bank – Austrian Joint
    Venture, case COMP/M.1714 – Föreningssparbanken/FI-Holding/FIH
                                                           2

12. For the purpose of the present case, it is not necessary to define the relevant
      product/service markets, since the operation would not lead to the creation or
      strengthening of a dominant position under any possible market definition.
 Relevant geographic markets
13. According to the parties the geographic delineation of the three main markets may vary.
      The retail market is predominantly national, corporate banking is partly international
      and financial services are international.
14. The Commission has stated in previous cases, that with regard to retail banking the
      relevant geographic market is to be considered national in scope due to the competitive
      conditions, which in individual Member States are still different due to the importance
      of local presence (network of branches). On the other hand, an increasing trend points
      towards internationalisation and the present situation may change in the longer term
      with the introduction of the single currency and new technologies, e.g. internet and
      telephone banking.
15. According to the Commissions practice, certain service segments with regard to
      corporate banking will continue to be required and supplied at a national level.
      However, some segments of corporate banking seem to have a more international
      dimension. In earlier decisions the Commission has found that the relevant geographic
      market appears to be national for small and medium-sized corporate clients and
      international for large corporate clients.
16. With regard to activities related to financial markets, the Commission has found
      financial services to be international in earlier decisions4 in respect to activities such as
      equity and dept issues, and international as regards money markets etc.
17. However, for the purpose of this case, it is not necessary to define the relevant
      geographic scope, because even under the narrowest market definition, the
      concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position.
VI. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
18. SEB is one of the main banks in Sweden and has significant market shares for virtually
      all types of banking services in Sweden. However, SEB is mainly active in the Nordic
      countries. Outside Scandinavia there are only minor overlaps with the activities of BfG.
19. BfG is mainly active in Germany, where it is a substantial bank. However, its market
      share is less than 15% on any possible market relevant market.
20. The operation only leads to market share additions in corporate banking in Germany
      and in retail banking in Luxembourg. On both markets will the parties have market
      shares of less than 15% after the merger. In particular the merger does not lead to
      market share additions in Sweden or the other Nordic countries.
21. If the geographic market was wider than national, then the market shares of the parties
      would be even lower than set out above.
4 Case No. M.1029 – Merita/Nordbanken.
                                                     3

VI. CONCLUSION
22. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                   For the Commission,
                                             4
