                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 29.03.2000
                                                                     SG (2000) D/
    In the published version of this decision, some
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article                        PUBLIC VERSION
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
    other confidential information. The omissions are                     MERGER PROCEDURE
    shown thus […]. Where possible the information                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
    general description.
                                                                    To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No COMP/M.1856-Citigroup/Schroders
             Notification of 28.02.2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 28.02.2000 the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) N0 4064/891 by which the
       undertaking Citigroup Inc., through its subsidiary Salomon Smith Barney Holdings
       Inc., acquires control of parts of the undertaking Schroders plc.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
       raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
3.     Citigroup Inc. (“Citigroup”) is a US based diversified holding company providing
       banking and financial services in particular: banking and lending services; investment
       advice, financial planning and extensive brokerage services; asset management
       products and services; and venture capital activities.
4.     Schroders plc. (“Schroders”) is a UK based financial company operating world-wide in
       investment banking and asset management.
1  OJ L 395, 30.12.1989, p.1; corrected version OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990,p.13; as last amended by Regulation
     (EC) No 1310/97, OJ L 180, 9.07.1997,p.1, corrigendum in OJ L 140, 13.02.1998, p.17.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

II.  THE OPERATION
5.   The notified operation concerns the acquisition by Citigroup, through its subsidiary
     Salomon Smith Barney Holding Inc. (“SSBH”), of part of Schroders’ activities, namely
     Schroder’s world-wide investment banking business which includes all corporate
     finance advice, broking and dealing in securities and other financial activities. In
     particular the acquired business deals with the following activities: advisory services in
     merger and acquisitions, and financial advice services in general; management,
     underwriting and distribution of equity and convertible bond issues; brooking and
     dealing in securities and other financial activities.
III. CONCENTRATION
6.   The acquisition of part of Schroder’s activities by Citigroup constitutes a concentration
     within the meaning of Article 3 (1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 billion2 (€ 68,000 million for Citigroup and € 873 million for Schroders’
     acquired business). Each of them have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR
     250 million ( € 4,000 million for Citigroup and € 336 million for Schroders’ target
     business), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-
     wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore
     has a Community dimension.
V.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
The relevant product markets
8.   The parties have overlapping activities in some markets for investment banking
     activities and to a lesser extent for commercial banking activities. However in
     commercial banking only Citigroup is a real provider while Schroders has very limited
     activities both in commercial credit and in leasing operations segments and therefore
     this market will not be treated further.
9.   In investment banking the relevant markets are : M & A advisory services and
     securities underwriting. Other financial services also provided by investment banks
     have also to be considered, such as securities and derivative trading and foreign
     exchange trading.
10. M & A advisory services consist in providing corporate advice on acquisitions and
     disposals by trade purchases/sales, public bids, privatisation, corporate restructuring ,
     corporate rescues and advice on demergers.
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into
    EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                           2

11. Securities underwriting, relates to the primary market, which means the offering of new
      issues (shares and bonds) to the public 3, and includes two segments, namely equity and
      debt underwriting. Both parties are active in equity underwriting only, both in Europe
      or world-wide. In other financial services provided by investment banks, the parties
      overlaps take place in securities trading, foreign exchange trading and derivatives
      trading.
12. However it is not necessary to further delineate these markets since, even if alternative
      definitions were considered there would be no creation or strengthening of dominant
      position in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
The relevant geographic markets
13. M & A services have traditionally been considered as of a national dimension for a
      number of reasons (e.g. knowledge of local corporate law, accounting rules or
      regulatory regimes etc). Notwithstanding the foregoing the recent development of this
      activity world-wide has produced an increasing number of operations with a trans-
      border dimension and therefore a need for large groups providing these services. For
      these reasons this market could be viewed increasingly as at least a European market,
      except perhaps in smaller economies for transactions involving mainly local
      companies.
14. For securities underwriting the parties claim that the geographic scope is considered to
      be at least European wide if not global, except for transactions on regulated exchanges.
      For the other financial services above described the parties consider that for securities
      trading and derivatives trading the markets are at least European-wide except for
      transactions on regulated exchanges, traditionally treated as of a national dimension.
      For foreign exchange trading markets the parties claim that it has a global dimension.
15. However it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant geographic markets as in
      any market definition considered, effective competition will not be significantly
      impeded en the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
Assessment
16. For M & A services the parties have submitted league tables for the last three years
      which show their respective positions both at national and the EEA level. Such league
      tables are only an approximate indicator of market shares, since they use numbers and
      sizes of deals managed as a measure for classifying investment banks, whereas fee
      income should be used where a precise determination of markets shares is necessary.
      However such league tables can be used as a rough indicator which can identify
      potential problems.
17. In the present case league tables show that the combined market shares of both parties
      in any of the past three years are below 15 % either in a global or European market. At
      national level only in two European countries the parties’ combined market shares were
      slightly above 15 % in 1999, namely Finland ([…] %) and Ireland ([…] %) while in
      those two countries no overlapping took place in 1998. This is a very fragmented
      market with a few number of competitors with similar market shares and a high
3 See Case IV/M.597-Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G. Warburg
                                                     3

    number of players with much smaller ones. In addition market positions are not stable
    and depend mainly on the number of contracts obtained and their economic value.
18. As far as the equity underwriting market is concerned, the parties’ combined market
    share will remain below 10 % both in international equities and in equity-linked issues,
    regardless of the market segment considered in each of them. As regards other financial
    services as above identified, the parties’ combined market shares are also below 10 %
    both in securities trading, foreign exchange trading and derivatives trading.
19. The low market shares in all relevant markets as above shown and the special features
    of these markets, characterised by a high number of competitors and volatile market
    shares, tend to indicate that no particular competition problem will arise from this
    concentration.
VI. CONCLUSION
20. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                       For the Commission,
                                                       Romano PRODI
                                                       President
                                                 4
