                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 09/06/2000
                                                                             PUBLIC VERSION
 In the published version of this decision, some
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                          MERGER PROCEDURE
 other confidential information. The omissions are                        ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.
                                                                    To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject:            Case No COMP/M.1989 –Winterthur Life/Colonial
Notification of 11/05/2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1. On the 11/05/2000 the Commission received a notification of a proposed
     concentration pursuant of Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 4064/891
     whereby, Winterthur Life UK Holdings Limited, (Winterthur Life) UK proposes
     to acquire, within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of Council Regulation, sole
     control of Colonial (UK) plc (Colonial) UK by way of purchase of shares.
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
     notified operation fall within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
     and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market
     and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I      THE PARTIES
3. Winterthur Life, a company incorporated in England and Wales, is ultimately
     owned by the Credit Suisse Group which is active in a wide range of financial
     services.
1 OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p.1 corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.09.1990, p.13; Regulation as last amended by
     Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9.7.1997, p1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p 17)
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel – Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

4. Colonial is a company incorporated in England and Wales, it is a wholly-owned
    subsidiary of Colonial International Holdings Pty limited, and is active in life
    assurance and pensions solely within the UK.
II    THE OPERATION
5. The operation involves the acquisition of the entire share capital of Colonial by
    Winterthur Life.
III CONCENTRATION
6. The operation is a concentration in the sense of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation since Winterthur Life will acquire sole control of Colonial.
IV    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
    more than EUR 5 billion2 (Credit Suisse Group: EUR 43 871 million, Colonial:
    EUR 369 million). Each have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250
    million (Credit Suisse Group: EUR 10 457 million, Colonial EUR 369 million),
    but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide
    turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore
    has a Community dimension.
V        COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
8. The parties overlap in the provision of life assurance and pensions in the UK there
    are also some limited overlap in the general insurance market in the UK.
A        The relevant product markets
(i)      Life assurance and pension products
9. The Notifying Party suggests that life assurance products and pensions products
    are in the same market. From the demand-side both products could be considered
    substitutes as they are both long-term business products involving a premium
    payment by the insured and a liability on the part of the insurance company which
    becomes payable many years later. Furthermore, both products involve a certain
    degree of risk on the part on the insurance company in respect of the length of life
    and the individual insured. Supply-side considerations also indicate strong
    substitutability as both products are generally offered by the same companies and
    providers are subject to the same regulatory regime. This approach is similar to
    the one taken previously (Case No IV/M.1691 – AEGON UK/GRE). The
    Notifying Party believes that it may be possible to make a distinction between
    products sold to individuals and products sold to groups. However, in this case it
    is not necessary for the Commission to define the relevant product market(s) as,
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Notice on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include
    turnover for the period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange
    rates and translated into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                   2

     even on the basis of the narrowest definition, the proposed acquisition does not
     raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market or a
     substantial part of it.
(ii) General insurance products
10. The Notifying Party identifies an overlap in two separate general insurance
     sectors: ‘household and domestic all risk’ and ‘accident and health’. Within
     general insurance there could be as many distinct product markets as there are risk
     categories, nevertheless a degree of supply substitutability may exist for products
     which require a common set of skill and resources.
11. However, in the present case it is not necessary to define the product markets
     because, even on the narrowest market definition, the proposed acquisition does
     not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market or a
     substantial part of it.
B         Relevant Geographical Market
12. The Notifying Party views the geographical markets for life assurance, pensions
     products and general insurance as national at present. In previous cases the
     Commission has established that life assurance market are becoming more open to
     inter-community competition, particularly for industrial and commercial policies,
     as a result of current and future measures to facilitate cross-border selling3.
     Nevertheless, in the view of established market structures, the need for adequate
     distribution channels, fiscal constraints in some cases and differing national
     systems of regulatory supervision the Commission has previously considered the
     markets national. (See case No IV/M.759 – Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance).
13. However, in the present case it is not necessary to conclusively define the relevant
     geographic markets because, even on the narrowest definition, the concentration
     does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of with effective
     competition would be significantly impeded in the common market or any
     substantial part of it.
C         Assessment
Life assurance and pension products
14. According to the Notifying Party there are no affected markets. If the relevant
     market were to include both life assurance and pensions in the UK, then the
     combined market share would be less than 1%, and if life assurance and pensions
     are considered separately the market share would be less than 3% in either case.
     If life assurance and pension products sold to individuals are considered separately
     from and those arranged for groups the combined market share would be below
     4% in both categories.
15. On this basis the proposed concentration does not give rise to competition
     concerns.
3 Case No IV/M.627-Uap/Sun Life; Case No. IV/M.1009-Generali/AMB/Athena
                                              3

(ii) General insurance products
16. Neither party provides general insurance directly but acts as intermediaries in
     respect of certain general insurance products. In the ‘household and domestic all
     risks’ market Winterthur Life sell insurance provided by Churchill Insurance (part
     of the same group as Winterthur), it has a market share of less than 1.5%
     (including insurance sold by Churchill). In the ‘accident and health’ market
     Winterthur introduces insurance provided by Paymentshield and has a market
     share of less than 1%. Similarly, Colonial provides household insurance for
     Select & Protect and CGU, and accident insurance for Paymentshield. Its market
     share is in both cases substantially less than 1%.
17. The overlap in this case is insignificant and does not raise competition concerns.
VI     ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
18. Colonial accepts for a period of […] a non-competition clause for the retained
     group not to carry out Long Term Business and accepts not to solicit employees
     which are at present employees of ‘any group company’.
19. Colonial International agrees that it shall not and shall procure that all other
     companies in the Vendor’s Group shall not carry on Long Term Business in the
     United Kingdom under the name ‘Colonial’ for a period of […] from completion.
20. The purpose of these provisions is to protect the goodwill of the business being
     acquired. The restrictions apply only for a finite duration and are limited to the
     business carried on at the date of the agreement. The restriction for […] is
     considered necessary to protect the interest of consumers and to meet regulatory
     concerns. The restriction does not prevent any member of Colonial International
     conducting long term business in the UK under any name other than ‘Colonial’.
     The Commission regards these provisions as transitional measures in the transfer
     of business and does not consider them to restrict competition unduly.
VII CONCLUSION
21. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
     Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                               For the Commission
                                              4
