                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 10.04.2000
In the published version of this decision, some                              PUBLIC VERSION
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information                            MERGER PROCEDURE
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                        ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
general description.
                                                                        To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.1910 – MeritaNordbanken/Unidanmark
             Notification of 9 March 2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No
             4064/89
1.     On 9 March 2000, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by which Nordic Baltic
       Holding AB (“Nordic Baltic Holding”), the holding company of the MeritaNordbanken Group
       (“MeritaNordbanken”) and the Unidanmark Group (“Unidanmark”) merge their activities.
2.      After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
        operation falls within the scope of the Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
        raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning
        of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES' ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
3.      The business activities of the undertakings concerned are:
        - Nordic Baltic Holding: holding company for MeritaNordbanken
        - MeritaNordbanken: a universal Finnish/Swedish bank, which provides a wide range of
        banking and financial services to households, companies and institutions, primarily in
        Finland and Sweden. Other companies of the MeritaNordbanken group provide services
        relating to sale and leasing of residential and corporate premises as well as some insurance
        activities in particular related to pension and life insurance.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

        - Unidanmark: a Danish financial group with activities in banking and insurance. It is active
        in banking through its banking branch Unibank A/S (“Unibank”). Unibank is the second
        largest Danish bank. It is a universal bank with the large majority of its activities in Denmark.
        Unidanmark is active in insurance through its insurance branch Tryg-Baltica Forsikring A/S
        (“Tryg-Baltica”). Tryg-Baltica is mainly active in insurance in Denmark and Norway.
4.     Through the transaction all the activities of MeritaNordbanken and UniDanmark, will be
       brought under the group holding company Nordic Baltic Holding and under a single
       commercial management. The transaction is to be carried out through a share exchange offer
       by Nordic Baltic Holding for all the outstanding shares of Unidanmark. After the transaction
       Nordic Baltic Holding will hold all the shares of Unidanmark.
II.    CONCENTRATION
5.      The merger between two previously independent undertakings, MeritaNordbanken and
        Unidanmark, will constitute a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the
        Merger Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.      The notifying parties have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of ECU 5,000
        million (MeritaNordbanken, Euro 7 468 million in 1999; Unidanmark Euro 5 766, in 1999).
        Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of ECU 250 million
        (MeritaNordbanken, Euro 7 202 million in 1999; Unidanmark, Euro 4 773 in 1999), but they
        do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one
        and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension,
        but it does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement, pursuant to Article
        57 of that agreement.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
       A. Relevant product markets
7.     The Commission has consistently held that the services typically supplied by a universal bank
       may be divided into the following areas: retail banking, corporate banking and financial
       market services.1 By retail banking is meant banking services to households which consist,
       for example, of deposits, lending, credit cards and mutual funds and other forms of asset
       management. By corporate banking is meant banking services to corporate clients which
       consists, for example, of deposits, lending, international payments, letters of credit and advice
       concerning mergers and acquisitions. With respect to financial markets the following
       activities may constitute distinct service markets: trading in equities, bonds, and derivatives,
       foreign exchange and money markets (i.e. treasury bills and commercial paper from banks
       and companies). The investigation confirmed this view with regard to Sweden, Finland and
       Denmark. The investigation also showed that it cannot be excluded that a further subdivision
       of retail banking, corporate banking and financial market services is relevant for the
       assessment of market conditions.
1 See, for example, Case IV/M.1029 – Merita/Nordbanken
                                                        2

8.     As regards insurance activities at a first level a distinction can be made between life
       insurance, non-life insurance and re-insurance. It cannot be excluded that further distinction,
       should be made, for example, according to the types of risks covered.
9.     However, it is not necessary to define further the relevant product markets for the purpose of
       the present case, because the concentration, even on the narrowest market definition, does not
       create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
       significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
       B. Relevant geographic markets
10. The notifying parties state that the relevant geographic markets are either national or
       international in scope depending on the specific banking sector. Retail banking and corporate
       banking are in most cases considered to be national in scope. The situation may, however,
       change in the future as a result of single currency and of new technologies. Investment
       banking and the financial markets are normally more international in scope, at least for
       certain categories of customers.
11. The Commission has stated in previous cases2 that with regard to retail banking the relevant
       geographic market is to be considered national in scope due to the competitive conditions
       which in individual Member States are still different despite the increasing trend towards
       internationalisation, and due also to the importance of a network of branches. As far as the
       situation in Finland, Sweden and Denmark is concerned, the results of the investigation have
       confirmed this view. There are, however, indications that the present situation may change in
       the longer term with the introduction of the single currency and new technologies, e.g.
       internet and telephone banking.
12. With regard to corporate banking the Commission has generally taken the view that certain
       product segments will continue to be required and supplied at national level.3 However, some
       sectors of corporate banking seem to have a more international dimension. The results of the
       investigation in Finland, Sweden and Denmark confirm this view. The results also indicate
       that the relevant geographic market appears to be national for small and medium-sized
       corporate clients and international for large corporate clients. As regards financial market
       services the relevant geographic market appears to be international in scope.
13. As far as insurance is concerned the Commission has in previous cases found that insurance
       markets are national with the exception of reinsurance, which is international.
14. However, whether the relevant geographic markets are considered to be national or
       international need not be finally decided in the present case because, on the basis of the
       assessment set out below, even on the narrowest market definition, the concentration does not
       create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
       significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
       C. Assessment
2 See, for example, Case IV/M.1029 – Merita/Nordbanken
3 See, for example, Case IV/M.1029 – Merita/Nordbanken
                                                       3

    Retail banking
15. With regard to retail banking MeritaNordbanken is almost exclusively active in Finland and
    Sweden, whereas Unibank is mainly active in Denmark. Thus, in retail banking their
    activities are largely geographically complementary.
    Corporate banking and financial market services
16. MeritaNordbanken is the most important and largest financial institution in Finland. In
    corporate banking its market share for lending was thus 48%, in deposits 47%, in
    international payments 61% and in letters of credit 50% in 1999. MeritaNordbanken is also
    the third largest bank in Sweden. In corporate banking its market share for lending is thus
    17%, in deposits 22% and in letters of credit 23% in 1999. Similarly, Unibank is the second
    largest Danish bank. In Denmark it had 23% market share in deposits, 32% in lending, [20-
    30%] of international payments and [20-30%] of letters of credit in 1999. However, the only
    overlaps between the parties are in certain corporate banking and certain financial market
    services in Sweden and Finland. However, either these overlaps are insignificant (Unibank
    has less than [0-10%] market share) or the combined market shares are not higher than 20%.
    Furthermore, in each of the three countries strong domestic competitors will continue to
    exists.
17. It should also be noted that a further deregulation of financial activities will take place. The
    highly innovative and evolving nature of the banking market combined with the recent
    increase of electronic banking tools may further contribute to easier access to the market.
    Several major non-Finnish banks have thus already entered the Finnish market and future
    expension plans cannot be excluded.
18. In principle Unibank might have expected to further develop its limited activities in Finland
    and Sweden and MeritaNordbanken in Denmark. However, in view of the large number of
    potential entrants to the Finnish, Swedish and Danish markets the elimination of Unibank as
    potential entrants to the Finnish and Swedish markets can not be considered to restrict
    competition on these markets. Similarly, the removal of MeritaNordbanken as a potential
    entrant to the Danish market will not restrict competition on the Danish market.
    Insurance
19. The parties’ market positions concerning the insurance market are the following:
    MeritaNordbanken has a market share of 26% for life insurance in Finland and Nordbanken
    has 1.5% in Sweden. Unidanmark is an important player on the Danish insurance markets,
    but MeritaNordbanken is not active in insurance in Denmark. Consequently, the proposed
    merger does not have any significant effect on the parties position in any insurance market.
                                                    4

     Conclusion
20. MeritaNordbanken in particular has a strong position on the Finnish market. However, the
    present merger does not reinforce its position, either in the banking sector or insurance sector
    on this market, to such an extent that a dominant position would be created as a result of
    which effective competition would be significantly impeded. The financial power of
    Unidanmark will not significantly reinforce MeritaNordbanken’s position either. On the
    contrary, further internationalisation and deregulation of financial activities could erode, in
    the future, the present position of MeritaNordbanken. Consequently, the proposed
    concentration does not strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
    competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
V.  CONCLUSION
21. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and
    to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
    (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                              For the Commission,
                                                    5
