                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 15.06.2000
                                                                     SG(2000)D/
  In the published version of this decision, some                            PUBLIC VERSION
  information has been omitted pursuant to
  Article 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No
  4064/89 concerning non-disclosure of business                           MERGER PROCEDURE
  secrets and other confidential information. The                       ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
  omissions are shown thus […]. Where possible
  the information omitted has been replaced by
  ranges of figures or a general description.
                                                                        To the notifying party
Dear Madam/Sir,
Subject: Case No COMP/M.1947 – ABN AMRO LEASE HOLDING / DIAL GROUP
             Notification of 10.05.2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 2 May 2000, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       arising from the acquisition of the Dial Group by ABN AMRO Lease Holding N.V.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
       doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
3.     ABN Amro Lease Holding N.V. ("AALH"), a wholly-owned subsidiary of ABN Amro
       Bank N.V. (“ABN Amro”), is a Dutch company operating world-wide in the vehicle and
       equipment leasing businesses.
4.     Dial Group comprises the four companies subject to the deal, namely Dial Contracts Ltd
       (UK); Dial France S.A (F); Dial Spania S.A.(E); and Dial Italia S.p.A (I). Dial Group is
       active in the vehicle leasing business in the UK, France, Spain and Italy.
II.    THE OPERATION
5.     The operation involves the acquisition of sole control by AALH over the four companies
       composing the Dial Group by means of acquisition of the entire issued share capital.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

III. CONCENTRATION
6.    The transaction, by which AALH intends to acquire sole control of the whole of Dial
      Group, is a concentration within the meaning of article 3(1) (b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
      than EUR 5 billion1. Each of ABN Amro and Dial Group have a Community-wide
      turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (ABN Amro € […] million; Dial Group € […]
      million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-
      wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore
      has a Community dimension.
V.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
      Relevant Product Markets
8.    The parties overlap in the area of vehicle leasing. The vehicle leasing sector may be
      sub-divided into two segments: operating leases and financial leases, and further
      categorised according to the type of vehicle which is leased.
9.    Operating leasing involves the management of the fleet under lease, as well as bearing
      the risks of ownership. Financial leasing generally involves the provision of finance to
      the lessee, with the lessor bearing none of the risks of ownership. In previous cases in
      this sector2 it has not proved necessary to decide whether operating leasing constitutes
      a distinct market from that of financial leasing.
10. The notifying party considers that the lease of cars and light vans, i.e. vehicles weighing
      less than 3.5 tonnes, constitutes a distinct relevant market from the leasing of heavier
      vehicles.
11. For the purposes of this decision, it is not necessary to define the relevant product
      markets either in terms of operating/financial leasing or in terms of the weight of the
      vehicles on lease, since irrespective of the precise definition to be adopted, the
      assessment of the notified concentration would not change.
      Relevant Geographic Markets
12. In accordance with previous decisions in similar markets3, the notifying party considers
      that the relevant geographic markets are national. For the purposes of this decision it is
      not necessary to define the relevant geographic markets, since irrespective of the
1   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into
    EUR on a one-for-one basis.
2   IV/M234-GEC/AVIS Lease and IV/M.664-GRS Holding
3   ibid
                                                           2

    precise definition to be adopted, the assessment of the notified concentration would not
    change.
    Assessment
13. On the basis of widely defined product markets, there would be no affected markets.
    On the basis of the narrowest possible market definition, namely the (national) supply
    of operating leases for cars and light vans, the only horizontally affected market would
    be in Spain.
14. The notifying party’s estimate of market shares for the supply of operating leases for
    cars and light vans in Spain between 1997 and 1999 show the parties’ combined share
    falling from [between 50-40] % in 1997 (increment [10-20] %), to [between 35-25] %
    in 1999 (increment [5-15] %). It also estimates that the market has grown at an average
    annual rate of 33% between 1994 and 1998 and forecasts that growth rates of this
    magnitude are expected to continue. The notifying party has also provided evidence of
    successful entry. For example, one company entered the market in 1996 and had gained
    nearly 10% market share by 1999.
15. The current market shares, the high levels of current and forecast growth and the
    relative ease of entry have been confirmed in the course of the market investigation.
VI. CONCLUSION
16. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                       For the Commission,
                                                       Mario MONTI,
                                                       Member of the Commission
                                                 3
