                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 04/08/2000
                                                                     SG(2000)D/
 In the published version of this decision, some                            PUBLIC VERSION
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information                           MERGER PROCEDURE
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.
                                                                        ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                        To the notifying party
Subject: Case No COMP/M.1979 - CDC/BANCO URQUIJO
             Notification of 03.07.2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
1. On 03.07.2000, the Commission received the notification of a proposed operation by
     which the undertakings Caisse des dépôts et consignations ("CDC", France) and Banco
     Urquijo of Spain (“Banco Urquijo”) will acquire joint control over a Joint Venture
     company, named Banco CDC Urquijo S.A. (“Banco CDC Urquijo”).
2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
      operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 4064/891 (the
      “Merger Regulation”) and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
      common market and with the EEA Agreement.
I.    THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
3.    CDC is a French public-sector institution initially established to safeguard private
      deposits. CDC is inter alia currently active either directly or through subsidiaries in
      banking and finance, life insurance, service and support for local development, saving
      funds and social housing. Most of CDC's business is achieved in France.
1    OJ L 395, 30.12.1989, amended by OJ L 180, 9.7.1997
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

4.   Banco Urquijo is a subsidiary of Kredietbank SA Luxembourgeoise, a Luxembourg
     based private and investment bank which offers a complete range of financial products
     and services and which is in turn owned by the Almanij Group, an international network
     of financial institutions and companies. Banco Urquijo is a private and investment bank
     based in Spain. It has concentrated its activities in the areas of multinational companies,
     high-income individuals and business banking providing all kinds of banking services
     such as specialised advice, custody, agency relating to foreign currencies and stocks,
     complementary banking activities (deposit, loans, transfers). Most of Banco Urquijo’s
     business is achieved in Spain.
II.   CONCENTRATION
5.   The Transaction consists of the acquisition by CDC and Banco Urquijo of joint control
     over a newly created company incorporated by them, Banco CDC Urquijo, which will
     carry out custody activities for institutional investors and corporate bodies in Spain. It
     may expand its operations into […][unnamed country] in the future.
6.   Banco Urquijo will contribute its current institutional custody operations in Spain to
     Banco CDC Urquijo and will also acquire a […]% stake in the newly created company.
     CDC will acquire a […]% participation in Banco CDC Urquijo. CDC will be entitled to
     appoint […] out of […] members of the board of Directors. Decisions on strategic
     business issues will, however, have to pass the Supervisory Board which decides by
     qualified majority vote, thus requiring the approval of both shareholders. The parent
     companies will thus acquire joint control over Banco CDC Urquijo. Banco CDC
     Urquijo will be established on a lasting basis and will be vested with the necessary
     financial and human resources in order to perform all the functions of an autonomous
     economic entity. It will be able to use the CDC and Banco Urquijo brand names. Banco
     Urquijo will withdraw from the custodian services activities performed for institutional
     clients in Spain. The operation therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning
     of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.   The combined aggregate world-wide turnover of the undertakings concerned is more
     than €2 5,000 million (CDC € 25,700 million; Banco Urquijo (Almanij) € 15,847
     million). The aggregate Community-wide turnover of the undertakings is more than €
     250 million (CDC € […] million; Banco Urquijo € […] million) and the undertakings
     do not each attain more than two- thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover in
     one and the same Member State. Hence the concentration has a Community-wide
     dimension. It does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement pursuant
     to Article 57 of that Agreement.
2     Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(3) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
      Notice on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover
      for the period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and
      translated into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                          2

IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
A. The relevant product markets
8.  The parties consider that custodian services for institutional clients in Spain is likely to
    be the relevant market with respect to the transaction. The parties describe custodian
    services to encompass safekeeping for securities and equities (as a sub-segment of the
    financial services market) as well as the management of cash accounts linked to such
    securities and equities (sub-segment of the corporate banking market).
9.  Within custodian services, the notifying parties propose to differentiate between “global
    custody services market”, comprising services to investment institutions owning or
    managing securitised investments, “domestic institutional custody services”, comprising
    services destined to institutions which require only domestic services (asset managers,
    pension funds, broker dealers, etc.) and “domestic retail custodian services”, comprising
    custody of securities belonging to individual clients.
10. The Commission in the case “Bank of New York/Royal Bank of Scotland Trust Bank”3
    has distinguished between global and domestic custodian services. In the present case
    this market definition remains appropriate. Whether domestic custodian services could
    be further subdivided into institutional custody services and retail custody services, can
    be left open, given that with neither of the two alternative market definitions the
    concentration will lead to the creation of a dominant position.
B. The relevant geographical markets
11. The parties argue that “global custody services”, as implied by the name of this
    segment, would be a global market, in which numerous major international banks and
    other financial services companies are active. The parties contend that competition with
    regard to “retail custody services” would take place at a national level, given that
    customers requiring domestic services would have to be served through a local branch
    network. The same would hold true for “domestic institutional custody services” as
    such services would be provided through a local custodian.
12. Given that the proposed operation does not raise serious doubts with any of the above-
    mentioned definitions, the question of the exact geographic scope for the provision of
    custodian services can be left open in the present case.
C.  Assessment
13. The parties do not have any overlapping activities in any of the relevant product
    markets. Neither of the parties has activities in global custody services. Banco Urquijo
    is active in domestic retail custody services in Spain, but CDC is not active in this
    market, nor will the joint venture. As regards domestic institutional custody services
    Banco Urquijo will contribute all its activities in Spain to Banco CDC Urquijo, which
    in 2000 will have an estimated market share of [0-5]%4 in Spain. At any rate, there will
3  Case No IV/M.1618-Bank of New York/Royal Bank of Scotland Trust Bank, decision of 25.08.1999.
4  Overall market for domestic institutional custody services and domestic retail custody service.
                                                          3

    be no overlap in the activities between the parties and the joint venture and there will be
    no market share addition resulting from the operation.
14. Hence it can be concluded that the proposed operation does not create or strengthen a
    dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly
    impeded in the common market or a substantial part of it.
V. ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
15. The parties submit that the following restrictions contained in the Shareholders
    Agreement would constitute ancillary restrictions.
16. Pursuant to clause […] of the Shareholders Agreement, the parties for the life span of
    the Shareholders' Agreement (being […] years at minimum), shall not directly or
    indirectly solicit, initiate or respond to any approach made with a view to enter into a
    joint venture or more generally into a transaction having an object similar of falling
    within the territorial scope and scope of activity of Banco CDC Urquijo, which may
    conflict with the purposes of the Shareholders Agreement. The territorial scope of this
    non-compete clause may be extended to [unnamed country] by a majority vote of […]
    of the Board of Directors (clause […] of the Shareholders Agreement).
17. Pursuant to clause […] and Annex […] of the Shareholders Agreement, Banco Urquijo
    commits itself to use exclusively Banco CDC Urquijo for certain custodian activities
    which are not transferred to the subsidiary (in respect of non-institutional clients) for at
    least a period of […] years. Pursuant to the same provision and Annex […] of the
    Shareholders Agreement, CDC undertakes to transfer to Banco CDC Urquijo its
    custody accounts held in Spain and maintain them at least […] years on an exclusive
    basis. Pursuant to Clause […] and Annex […] of the Shareholders Agreement, Banco
    Urquijo commits that it will cause its parent KBL and Urquijo Gestión to […] [certain
    businesses].
18. For none of the above restrictions have the Parties given any specific justification as to
    their duration ([…] years or even […]). Neither have they given any justification for the
    restriction concerning activities that have not been transferred to the joint venture. A
    non-compete restriction may be considered as directly related to the concentration and
    necessary to its implementation only insofar as it concerns products and services in
    which the vendor (Banco Urquijo) is active upon completion of the operation and
    insofar as it relates to geographic markets where the vendor is already active (Spain).
19. Therefore, within the meaning of the Merger Regulation, the non-compete clause can be
    regarded as directly related and necessary for the implementation of the operation only
    for a period of three years from implementation and only with regard to Banco CDC
    Urquijos’ activities in Spain. The remaining restrictions cannot be considered to be
    directly related to and necessary to the implementation of the concentration and thus
    ancillary in nature and are therefore not covered by the present decision.
                                                   4

VI. CONCLUSION
20. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the
    EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6 (1) (b) of the
    Merger Regulation.
                                                    For the Commission,
                                              5
