                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 27.04.2000
   In the published version of this decision,
   some information has been omitted pursuant                            PUBLIC VERSION
   to Article 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC)
   No 4064/89 concerning non-disclosure of
   business secrets and other confidential                            MERGER PROCEDURE
   information. The omissions are shown thus                       ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
   […]. Where possible the information omitted
   has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
   general description.
                                                                 To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No COMP/M.1902 – TELIA/COMMERZBANK/FNH
            Notification of 23 March 2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
            No 4064/89
1.    On 23 March 2000, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
      concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by
      which Telia AB (“Telia”) and Commerzbank AG (“Commerzbank”) will acquire within
      the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation joint control of the Luxembourg
      company First National Holding (“FNH”), and indirectly through FNH also of OAO
      Telecominvest (“TCI”), Russia, both currently controlled by Commerzbank AG.
2.    After an examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
      notified operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 4064/89 and
      does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with
      the EEA Agreement.
I.    THE PARTIES
3.    Telia is the parent company of the Telia Group, a company wholly owned by the Swedish
      state and active as an international data- and telecommunication service provider.
4.    Commerzbank is a large German bank, whose business activities include retail,
      commercial and investment banking, foreign exchange trading, securities trading and
      assets management.
5.    FNH is a Luxembourg company, the sole purpose of which is to act as a holding
      company for the purpose of investing and holding shares in TCI, a Russian joint stock
      company. The only asset of FNH consists of a 51% stake in TCI, which will be raised
      to 75.1% as a result of the proposed transaction. At present, FNH is controlled by
      Commerzbank AG.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

6.   TCI, which was founded in 1995, acts as a holding company with stakes in several
     joint ventures providing telecommunication services in north-west of Russia, mainly
     mobile telephony and digital fibre optics network in St Petersburg. The joint ventures
     of TCI were created during the early 1990’s by the two former monopoly operators of
     local and long-distance telecommunications services in St Petersburg with some
     Western telecommunication operators. TCI is currently controlled by Commerzbank AG.
II.  THE OPERATION
7.   According to the parties, the acquisition of joint control by Telia and Commerzbank of
     FNH, and indirectly also of TCI, takes place through the implementation of the
     Shareholders Agreement and the Share Subscription Agreement, both dated on 31
     January 2000. The Share Subscription Agreement is entered into between
     Commerzbank, First National Holding S.A., Dr Michael Boemke, OAO Telecominvest
     and Telia. The Shareholders Agreement is entered into between FNH, Commerzbank
     and Telia.
8.   Prior to the proposed concentration, FNH’s “Capital Social” consisted of 5375 voting
     shares with a nominal value of 100 USD each. Commerzbank owns a total of 5355
     voting shares and Dr Michael Boemke the remaining 20 shares. Following the
     completion of the concentration, and pursuant to the provisions of the Share
     Subscription Agreement, FNH’s “Capital Social” will consist of 10.000 shares. Telia
     purchases and subscribes for, and FNH issues, 2950 new, fully paid ordinary shares to
     Telia in a private placement, which corresponds to 29.50% of the share capital of FNH.
     In addition, FNH issues 1675 new FNH shares to Commerzbank and Dr Micahel
     Boemke transfers his holding in FNH to Commerzbank. Consequently, the total
     number of FNH shares owned by Commerzbank amounts to 7050 shares corresponding
     to 70.50% of the shares. Following the completion of the share subscriptions, FNH
     transfers the proceeds of the transaction to TCI to be used in accordance with the
     Shareholders’ Agreement.
III. CONCENTRATION
     Joint control and full functionality
9.   As already mentioned, the acquisition of joint control by Telia and Commerzbank over
     FNH, and indirectly also over TCI, takes place through the implementation of the
     Shareholders’ Agreement and the Share Subscription Agreement. Following the
     implementation of the notified concentration, Commerzbank has 70.50% ownership
     interest in FNH and Telia 29.50%. Telia will also contribute by providing the joint
     venture with its more profound knowledge of telecommunication business.
10. Pursuant to the provisions of the Shareholders’ Agreement, Commerzbank and Telia
     intend to exercise influence in Board of Directors of FNH, which consists of 7
     members, 5 to be appointed by Commerzbank and 2 by Telia. The Agreement provides
     that the approval of all members of the Board, and thus the agreement of both Telia
     and Commerzbank, is necessary for the approval of the most important strategic
     decisions, including the approval of any major Telecominvest actions or profit or loss
     statement, the acquisition of FNH of any assets or investment or capital expenditure in
     excess of 50.000 USD as well as the nomination of the company’s Managing Director.
     Therefore, despite the fact that in the Agreement Telia is referred to as the largest
     minority shareholder, its influence in the FNH, for the reasons stated above, amounts
     to joint control together with Commerzbank.
                                                  2

11. The Board of TCI comprises 11 members of which Commerzbank appoints 6 and Telia
     2 members (for Telia these must be the same persons as those appointed in the Board
     of FNH), and the remaining 3 members are appointed by the Russian companies
     SPMMT, an international and long-distance telecom operator in St Petersburg and
     PTN, a local telecom operator in St Petersburg. Commerzbank has the right to appoint
     the Chief Executive Officer of TCI. Although, there is no shareholders’ agreement
     between all of the shareholders in TCI, the Shareholders Agreement of FNH provides
     that, Telia’s consent is required for the most important strategic decisions, including,
     inter alia, the approval or implementation of any annual business plan or annual
     budget of TCI. It is provided in Section 5.1 (h) and 6.2 of the Agreement that, if both
     of Telia’s appointees on the Board of TCI do not approve of the actions at issue, then
     Commerzbank shall cause its representatives on the Board of TCI to vote against the
     proposed actions.
12. Therefore, it is concluded that the Shareholders Agreement of FNH provides that
     following the proposed concentration, the agreement of both parent companies will be
     required for the approval of the most important strategic decisions in the Boards of
     FNH and TCI. Consequently, FNH and TCI, through FNH, will be jointly controlled
     by Telia and Commerzbank. On the basis of the foregoing and in view of the fact that
     FNH and TCI are pre-existing companies, the notified operation constitutes a
     concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
13. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 billion (Telia EUR […] million and Commerzbank EUR […] million in
     1998)1. Each of Telia and Commerzbank have a Community-wide turnover in excess
     of EUR 250 million (Telia EUR [>250] million and Commerzbank EUR [>250]
     million in 1998), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
     Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified
     operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
14. The notifying parties consider that the concentration does not lead to any horizontal
     overlaps in any Member States, in the Community, or in the EEA between Telia and
     Commerzbank, or between Telia and Commerzbank on the one hand, and FNH and
     TCI on the other hand.
15. According to the parties, Telia is an international data- and telecommunication
     corporation based in Sweden and is not involved in business activities related to
     banking that would overlap with Commerzbank’s activities. Commerzbank is active in
     banking and has no controlling interests in any telecommunication corporation with
     business activities in the EEA.
1  Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation for Telia, Article 5(3) of
   the Merger Regulation for Commerzbank, and the Commission Notice on the calculation of turnover (OJ
   C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the period before 1.1.1999, they are
   calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                        3

16. The sole aim of FNH is to act as a holding company for the purpose of investing and
    holding shares in TCI. TCI has stakes in a number of joint ventures in the field of
    telecommunications in Russia but no present or foreseen activities in the EEA. The
    subsidiaries of TCI and the associated companies’ activities include the provision of
    mobile and fixed communications services, production of telecommunications
    equipment and billing systems. Given that the only potential overlap could thus be
    between the activities of Telia and TCI in the markets for provision of
    telecommunication services, and production of telecommunications equipment, and
    keeping in mind that Telia and TCI operate in different geographical markets, the
    proposed transaction, although falling within the scope of the Merger Regulation, does
    not raise concerns as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement.
VI. CONCLUSION
17. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                      For the Commission,
                                                4
