                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 30.05.2000
    In the published version of this decision, some                          PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                     MERGER PROCEDURE
    other confidential information. The omissions are                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
    shown thus […]. Where possible the information
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
    general description.
                                                                        To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No COMP/M.1944 – HSBC/CCF
             Notification of 25.04.2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1. The operation consists of a public offer made on 1 April 2000 by the UK holding
     company, HSBC Holdings plc (“HSBC”), for all the shares of the French company, CCF
     S.A. (“CCF”). The offer is conditional upon HSBC becoming the owner of more than
     50.01 % of the voting rights attached to the share capital of CCF at the time when the
     offer closes.
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the proposed
     operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
     raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the functioning
     of the EEA Agreement.
I.        THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
3. HSBC is a holding company for a leading banking and financial services organization,
     which has a global presence. It is active in several Member States, with the bulk of its
     income being generated in the UK, both in banking and insurance.
4. CCF is active in commercial banking and financial services, mainly in Europe. Most of
     its income in the Community is generated in banking in France, where it also has a
     relatively small presence in insurance.
5. HSBC, through the acquisition of a shareholding which would result in its having 50.01
     % or more of the voting rights attached to the share capital of CCF (on which the
     operation is conditional), would acquire sole control over CCF.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

II.      CONCENTRATION OF A COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6. The operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3.1.b. of the
     Merger Regulation.
7. HSBC and CCF have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of €5,000
     million (HSBC, €24,530 million; CCF, €2,401 million). Each of them has a Community-
     wide turnover in excess of €250 million (HSBC, €10,720 million; CCF, €2,139.9
     million), and they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their respective aggregate
     Community-wide turnovers within one and the same Member State. The notified
     operation, therefore, has a Community-wide dimension.
III.     COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
8. The concentration concerns the banking and insurance sectors. In banking, both parties
     overlap in their activities in various banking markets in several Member States, but in no
     instance do their combined shares exceed a 10% of the corresponding markets (including
     those in the UK and France), and in some instances such shares fall below a 5%. In
     insurance, there is no overlap in activities as a result of the operation, as CCF’s
     insurance activities are limited to France, where HSBC has no insurance activities.
9. Thus, given the level of the combined market shares in the various banking markets
     concerned, and given the lack of any overlap in any insurance market, the proposed
     operation will not lead to any affected market. In the circumstances, and in the absence
     of any other competition concerns arising from the proposed operation, it is considered
     that it will not lead to the creation or strengthening of a dominant position, in either of
     the sectors concerned, as a result of which effective competition would be significantly
     impeded in the common market or a substantial part thereof.
IV.      CONCLUSION
10. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
      and to declare it compatible with the common market and the EEA Agreement. This
      decision is adopted in application of Article 6.1.b. of Council Regulation (EEC) No
      4064/89.
                                                          For the Commission,
                                                          Signed M. SCHREYER (Member of
                                                          the Commission)
                                                    2
