                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 28/6/2000
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
 In the published version of this decision, some
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are                        MERGER PROCEDURE
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information                         ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.
To the notifying party
Dear Madam/Sir,
Subject: Case No. COMP/M. 1997 - Schroders / Liberty International Pensions Limited
             Notification of 22.05.2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.      On 22.05.2000, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
        pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by which the undertaking
        Schroders plc (UK) propose to acquire, within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of Council
        Regulation, sole control of the whole of Liberty International Pensions Limited (LIPL) (UK),
        a subsidiary of UK group Liberty International PLC, by way of purchase of shares.
2.      After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
        operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
        raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA
        Agreement.
I         THE PARTIES' ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
3.      Schroders is one of the world's leading asset management groups acting mainly as manager
        of active retail and wholesale funds.
4.      LIPL, a UK life insurance and pensions company, and its wholly-owned subsidiaries
        Hermes Liberty International Pensions Limited and Liberty International Services Limited
        provide pension products and services.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

5.     Schroders will acquire 100% of the ordinary share capital of LIPL from UK property group
       Liberty International (which owns 80% of the share capital of LIPL) and the Trustees of the
       BT Pension Scheme and Capital Group International Inc (which own 10% each).
II       COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.     Schroders (included Schroders Ventures Funds under its control) and LIPL’s combined
                                                                            1
       aggregate worldwide turnover exceeds EUR 5,000 million (Schroders, EUR […] million;
       and LIPL, EUR […] million). Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of
       EUR 250 million (Schroders, EUR […] million; and LIPL, EUR […] million), but they do
       not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one
       and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension,
       but does not constitute a cooperation case under the EEA Agreement, pursuant to Article
       57 of that Agreement.
III      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
7.     Schroders is one of the world's leading asset management groups with most of its clients in
       UK. It provides mainly fund management services covering equity, bond, private equity
       and real estate markets to a range of clients including pensions funds, government bodies,
       corporations, charities and high net worth individuals and family groups throughout the
       world (wholesale asset management segment). It also operates retail pooled funds, which
       are marketed on a retail basis to a larger number of individuals (retail asset management
       segment). Schroders’ share of funds under management would be well under 10% in the
       UK in each of the wholesale and retail asset management segments. There is a wide range
       of providers of asset management in both segments in the UK.
8.     LIPL is a specialist provider of defined contribution pension services. It does not itself
       carry out fund management. Its core activities are: a) Provision of defined contribution
       group personal pensions to employers and affinity groups. LIPL’s share in the UK would
       be less than 1%. b) Provision of pension administration services to other pension providers
       and to employers and trustees of pension schemes, on an outsourced basis. LIPL’s share in
       the UK would be less than 5%. c) Provision of index tracking fund management services
       and the underlying contract of insurance to institutional pensions funds and other pension
       providers. LIPL’s share in the UK would be less than 2%. There is a wide range of
       alternative pension providers in the UK.
9.     Schroders is not active in any of the product areas where LIPL is active; therefore there are
       no horizontally affected markets. And neither are there any vertically affected markets.
       Therefore, irrespective of the product and geographic market definitions to be adopted
1   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice on
    the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the period
    before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into EUR on a
    one-for-one basis.
                                                             2

     (UK, EEA-wide or global),no competition concerns arise from the proposed concentration.
     The precise market definitions can therefore be left open.
10.  In view of the market position of the parties to the concentration, it appears that the notified
     operation does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
     competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
IV     ANCILLARY RESTRICTIONS
11.  The notifying party has requested that the following provisions contained in the Share
     Purchase Agreement be assessed in conjunction with the concentration and declared
     restrictions ancillary to it:
    • a non-compete covenant limited in scope to the business of LIPL in the UK which will
       prevent Liberty International Financial Services group (LIFS) from acquiring or
       establishing any business which provides "pension scheme record keeping administration
       services whether or not provided with fund management services" to persons in United
       Kingdom for a period of […] after completion;
    • a non-solicit covenant prohibiting LIFS group from soliciting customers or employees
       from LIPL for […] after completion; and
    • a prohibition on LIFS using in relation to a business which is competitive or likely to be
       competitive with LIPL any trade or business name or distinctive mark, stripe or logo used
       by LIPL before completion.
12.  Such contractual prohibitions on competition on the vendor guarantee the transfer to the
     acquirer of the full value of the assets transferred. These are directly related to the
     concentration and necessary to protect Schroders against the possibility of the value of the
     business it is acquiring being undermined post-completion. These prohibitions match the
     criteria established in the Commission Notice regarding the treatment of restrictions
     ancillary to concentrations, particularly in the Title III "Evaluation of common ancillary
     restrictions in cases of the transfer of an undertaking", and, therefore, they can be declared
     as ancillary restrictions to the concentration.
V.     CONCLUSION
13.  For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
     and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
     decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No
     4064/89.
                                                                                   For the Commission,
                                                                                 (signed) Mario Monti
                                                     3
