                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 01/09/2000
                                                                     SG(2000)/D106464
   In the published version of this decision, some                         MERGER PROCEDURE
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article
                                                                        ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
   general description.
                                                                     To the notifying parties
Dear Madam/Sir,
Subject:            Case No COMP/M.- 2075 - Jupiter / M&G / Newhouse / Scudder / JV
                    Notification of 2.8.2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 2.8.2000, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration by which
       the UK-based company, Jupiter International Group Plc ("Jupiter"), controlled by the
       German bank, Commerzbank AG, the UK-based company M & G Limited ("M&G"),
       controlled by Prudential plc., the US company Newhouse Capital Partners LLC
       ("Newhouse"), controlled by the US Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company and the UK-
       based company Scudder Investments Holdings Limited ("Scudder"), controlled by the Swiss
       company, Zurich Financial Services, acquire joint control in a newly created company
       constituting a joint venture, Cofunds Limited ("CFL").
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not raise
       serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA
       Agreement.
I.        THE PARTIES' ACTIVITIES AND THE OPERATION
3.     CFL is conceived as an independent on line supermarket for sale of Retail Mutual Funds via
       Independent Intermediaries.
4.     The four parents of CFL, which belong to financial, insurance and banking groups above
       mentioned, provide investment management and fund management. CFL will be jointly
       owned by the four notifying parties, each with a 25% shareholding. The Joint Venture
       Agreement is signed also by the UK company, Gartmore Investment Management Plc, a
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

      group active in investment management, which belongs also to the Nationwide Mutual
      Insurance Company. However, Gartmore will exert its control only through Newhouse,
      given that it will not itself have any influence on the decisions of CFL. The four parent
      companies and Gartmore are together denominated “the Founders"
         Full function
5.    CFL's activities will consist of the provision of an electronic supermarket for the sale of
      Retail Mutual Funds through Independent Intermediaries. It will have management for its
      day to day operations, staff, finance and assets to operate on a lasting basis as an
      autonomous economic entity. CFL will have its own proprietary software system. At the
      outset, the majority of funds sold through the on-line supermarket are likely to be those of
      the parents; however it is anticipated that a substantial number of third Fund Manager
      companies will list their funds with CFL in the next two years.
         Joint control
6.    CFL will be owned equally by the four parent companies Jupiter, M&G, Newhouse and
      Scudder. Each parent company will have equal voting rights, and a number of key corporate
      governance and commercial decisions, such as the adoption of the business plan, are subject
      to the veto rights of each parent. Thus, the four parent companies will have the possibility to
      exercise decisive influence over CFL.
7.    The proposed Joint Venture constitutes, therefore, a concentration in accordance with the
      dispositions of Article 3 (2) and (3) of the Council Regulation.
II.      COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8.    Commerzbank AG, Prudential plc., Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company and Zurich
      Financial Services groups have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of EUR
      5,000 million1 (Commerzbank AG , EUR […]; and Prudential plc., EUR 24,960 million;
      Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, EUR 26,220 million; Zurich Financial Services,
      EUR 46,390 million).
9.    Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million
      (Commerzbank AG, EUR […]; Prudential plc., EUR […]; Nationwide Mutual Insurance
      Company, EUR […], Zurich Financial Services, […]), but they do not achieve more than
      two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member
      State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension according to Article
      1(2) of the Council Regulation.
1   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice on
    the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the period
    before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into EUR on a
    one-for-one basis.
                                                             2

III.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
        A.       Relevant product market
10. CFL's activities will be the provision in the open market of an electronic on-line
     supermarket for the sale of Retail Mutual Funds through Independent Intermediaries in the
     UK, based on a complex and expensive software, offering a large number of services to
     facilitate and support the sales and the accounting operations.
11. The notifying parties have proposed that the relevant product market on which CFL is
     present is the market for the provision of an electronic supermarket or other on-line dealing
     system for the sale of Retail Mutual Funds. It is not necessary to consider whether or not
     this market is part of a larger relevant product market for the provision of electronic
     supermarkets for a wider range of investment products as even on the narrow definition the
     operation will not give rise to competition concerns.
12. The notifying parties are not active on the same market as CFL. However, as Managers of
     Retail Mutual Funds, they are active on the related market for the design, creation and
     management of Retail Mutual Funds. Again it is not necessary to consider whether the
     Retail Mutual Funds market is part of a wider relevant product market encompassing a
     wider range of investment products as even on the narrow definition the operation will not
     cause competition problems.
        B.       Relevant geographic market
13. The parties state that the relevant geographic market for such activities is national, due to
     legal, regulatory and fiscal reasons and customer preferences. The Fund Managers make
     separate arrangements for marketing Retail Mutual Funds in each Member State and must
     comply with local conduct of business rules in force in the Member Sates as they relate to
     the marketing and distribution. In this case it is not necessary to define the relevant
     geographic market as even on the basis of an UK market the operation will not give rise to
     competition concerns.
        C.       Assessment
14. According to the information provided by the parties, there are no horizontally or vertically
     affected markets.
15. On-line supermarkets are a recent development in the distribution of Retail Mutual Funds.
     The new company, CFL, will face competition from other platforms, some of which have
     already been launched or will be launched in the near future. These new platforms include
     Fidelity FundsNetwork, Skandia, Fundhub, Fedsure and The Exchange.
16. In addition CFL will be subject to the competitive pressures of the conventional means of
     distribution including, tied agents/sales forces, direct sales and sales to private clients
     through banks and stockbrokers.
17. On the other hand, on the upstream market for the design, creation and management of the
     Retail Mutual Funds, the parties had a combined market share of 14% in 1999. They face
     competition from over 140 other suppliers of Retail Mutual Funds including Fidelity and
     Schroder the largest and second largest companies in this field.
                                                    3

    Possible Co-ordination
18. The parties are and will remain active in the market for the design, creation and
    management of the Retail Mutual Funds, which is a related market with regard to the
    relevant market. Therefore, it needs to be assessed whether the creation of CFL is likely to
    lead to an appreciable degree of co-ordination of the parties’ competitive behaviour on the
    market for the design, creation and investment management of the Retail Mutual Funds.
19. The first assessment which needs to be carried out is whether the parties together or
    separately have sufficient market power to make co-ordination worthwhile. As already
    pointed out above, this does not appear to be the case as they together only held 14,31% of
    the related market in 1999. In addition, there are over 140 fund manager companies in the
    UK. None of these companies appears to have a market share exceeding 7%. Accordingly, it
    appears that it is not likely that the parties have the possibility to restrict competition.
20. In any event, even if the parties had the market power to make co-ordination worthwhile, it
    is necessary to examine whether the establishment of the joint venture would give them the
    means. For this purpose, the risk of exchanging commercial sensitive information between
    the parties and between the parties and CFL has been examined.
21. To prevent the disclosure or exchange of such commercial sensitive information the parties
    have agreed on a number of provisions in the Joint Venture Agreement. In combination with
    the apparent lack of market power these provisions seem sufficient for the time being to
    negate the possibility of anti-competitive effects. Therefore there is no reason to believe that
    the joint venture will have as its object or effect, the co-ordination of the competitive
    behaviour of undertakings that remain independent such as to restrict competition to an
    appreciable degree.
Conclusion
22. On the basis of the facts set out above no competition problem arises from the proposed
    concentration. Consequently, it does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result
    of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any
    substantial part of this area.
IV     ANCILLARY RESTRICTIONS
23. The notifying parties have requested that the following provisions set out in the six points
    below be assessed in conjunction with the concentration and declared restrictions ancillary
    to it pursuant to the second paragraph of Article 6(1)(b), Council Regulation (EC)
    N° 4064/89:
           1           [Restrictions during the start up period]
           2           [Restrictions during the start up period]
24. The parties state that the Joint Venture needs sufficient time to establish itself on the
    market, and without these restrictions the concentration could only be implemented under
    more uncertain conditions and less probability of success. In particular, they state that the
    vital element required in establishing an on-line supermarket is the ability to offer a wide
    range of funds and that the portfolio of funds of the Founders will initially provide the
                                                      4

     critical mass required. This will attract other Funds Managers to list their products and
     independent intermediaries to use the on-line supermarket.
25. These restrictions which […] are necessary to ensure that during the start up the sales of the
     parents products through the supermarket are maximised. The restrictions are limited to
     […]. As a result the restrictions may be as directly related and necessary to assure the
     implementation of the concentration and their respective duration proportionate to their end.
     They may therefore be considered as restrictions ancillary to the concentration.
            3          [Obligation not to compete with the JV]
26. The obligation on the parties not to compete with the Joint Venture is covered by this
     decision as provided in the paragraph V, letter A of the Commission Notice regarding the
     treatment of restrictions ancillary to concentrations. It expresses the lasting withdrawal of
     the parents from the market assigned to the Joint Venture. In respect of the obligation for a
     parent not to compete with the Joint venture for a period of […], is considered proportionate
     to protect the CFL' business. This restriction may therefore be considered ancillary to the
     concentration.
            4          [Non-solicitation and confidentiality clauses]
            5          [Non-solicitation and confidentiality clauses]
            6          [Non-solicitation and confidentiality clauses]
27. The parties state that without theses restrictions, mentioned in point 4,5 and 6, the Joint
     Venture would not be able to take place and so they do not consider that such clauses are
     restriction on competition within the mean of the Article 81. In any case the parties argue
     that without such restrictions the Joint Venture would not be able to demonstrate the
     necessary independence from their parents as a key objective in creating CFL is to establish
     its business independently of the parties. These restrictions aim to ensure that CFL is not
     used as a means of exchanging commercial sensitive information, an essential factor in the
     context of the CFL' operations. The parties state also that the […] is also necessary to
     protect the business of the Joint Venture.
28. The non-solicitation and confidentiality clauses (points 4, 5 and 6) may be evaluated by
     analogy to the non-compete obligations. In this operation their restrictive effects are not
     separable from the concentration as they reinforce the reality of the lasting withdrawal of the
     parents from the marked assigned to the Joint Venture and the independence of the Joint
     Venture. The period of […] may be considered proportionate to its end.
In conclusion the mentioned restrictions (number 1 to 6) are considered directly related and
necessary to the implementation of the concentration and therefore they are covered by the
present decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b), second paragraph, of Council Regulation.
                                                    5

V.    CONCLUSION
29. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and
    to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
    decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No
    4064/89 and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
              For                              the                                Commission,
                     signed                                                                 by
                     Günther                                                   VERHEUGEN
                     Member                 of                the                 Commission
                                                 6
