                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 20.07.2000
    In the published version of this decision, some                         PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                     MERGER PROCEDURE
    other confidential information. The omissions are                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
    shown thus […]. Where possible the information
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
    general description.
                                                                     To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No COMP/M. 2012 – CGNU/ASEVAL
             Notification of 19.06.2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1. The operation consists of the acquisition by CGNU plc (“CGNU”), through its
     subsidiary, Commercial Union International Holdings Limited, of a 50% shareholding in
     Aseguradora Valenciana Sociedad Anonima de Seguros y Reaseguros (“Aseval”),
     belonging to Caja de Ahorros de Valencia, Castellon y Alicante (“Bancaja”).
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the proposed
     operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
     raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the functioning
     of the EEA Agreement.
I.        THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
3. CGNU, a UK insurance group, is the result of the recent merger between the UK
     company, CGU, and another UK insurance company, Norwich Union. CGNU’s
     principal activities are the transaction of all classes of insurance and life insurance, other
     than industrial life, as well savings products, in Europe, North America, Asia and
     Australia.
4. Aseval, a Spanish company, is active in underwriting and distributing life assurance in
     Spain through its parent, the Spanish banking group, Bancaja.
5. While the operation will result in both Bancaja and CGNU having a 50% shareholding
     in Aseval, nonetheless, CGNU will acquire sole control over Aseval, due to the voting
     arrangements for the Board of Directors, which provide for CGNU having a casting vote
     on strategic issues, including the budget and business plan.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

II.      CONCENTRATION OF A COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6. The operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3.1.b. of the
     Merger Regulation.
7. CGNU and Aseval have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of €5,000
     million (CGNU, €37,200 million; Aseval, €366.7 million). Each of them has a
     Community-wide turnover in excess of €250 million (CGNU, €28,259 million; Aseval,
     €366.7 million), and they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their respective
     aggregate Community-wide turnovers within one and the same Member State. The
     notified operation, therefore, has a Community-wide dimension.
III.     COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
8. The sector concerned by the operation is that of insurance and the geographic overlap
     between CGNU and Aseval in this sector occurs only in Spain, outside of which country
     Aseval is not active. More than 50% of CGNU’s income in the EU is gained in the UK,
     and its presence in Spain is relatively small.
9. Within insurance, the activities of CGNU and Aseval overlap in the areas of life
     insurance and general (non-life) insurance. The shares of both CGNU and Aseval are of
     a very limited size in the insurance products in which they overlap, with the result that
     their combined share is, in all cases, far from reaching the 15% level of an affected
     market. The operation does not produce any vertically affected markets either.
10. Given the lack of any affected markets and in the absence of any other competition
     concerns arising from the proposed operation, it is considered that it will not lead to the
     creation or strengthening of a dominant position as a result of which effective
     competition would be significantly impeded in the common market or a substantial part
     thereof.
IV.      CONCLUSION
11. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
      and to declare it compatible with the common market and the EEA Agreement. This
      decision is adopted in application of Article 6.1.b. of Council Regulation (EEC) No
      4064/89.
                                                        For the Commission,
                                                        Mario Monti
                                                        Member of the Commission
                                                    2
