                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                      Brussels, 15.09.2000
                                                                      SG(2000)D/106775
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                           MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                        ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                      To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject :       Case No COMP/M. 2131 - BCP/Interamerican Nova Bank JV
Date of notification : 17.8.2000
Legal Deadline : 18.9. 2000
1.      On 17 August 2000 the Commission received the notification of an operation by
        which Banco Comercial Portugues (“BCP”) and Interamerican Hellenic Life
        Insurance Company SA (“Interamerican”) will acquire control over a newly created
        joint venture “NovaBank” which will be active in retail banking in Greece.
2.      After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
        operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and does not raise
        serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning
        of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
3.      BCP is the leading banking and financial services group in Portugal offering a
        complete range of retail banking, private banking and corporate banking products and
        services. Through its subsidiaries, BCP also offers insurance services and asset
        management.
4.      Interamerican is one of the largest private insurance groups in Greece heading a group
        of companies active in life insurance and non-life insurance.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

II.   THE OPERATION
5.     Subsequent to the shareholders agreement entered into on 27th May 2000 by
       Interamerican, BCP, Intercapital Trust Limited1, BCP-IF SGPS Sociedade Unipessoal,
       LDA2 and the private individual Mr. Dimitris Contominas BCP Interamerican,
       Interamerican and BCP acquire joint control over a new start-up joint venture,
       NovaBank.
III. CONCENTRATION
6.     Both BCP and Interamerican will hold 50% of the company’s share capital. According
       to Article 15 of the Statute of NovaBank, the general meeting of shareholders decides
       with unanimous vote on the strategic business issues of the company, including the
       election of board members, the approval of the budget and the amendment of the
       Statute.3 NovaBank will perform on a lasting basis all the functions of an autonomous
       economic entity. It will have its own personnel and facilities and will operate
       independently of its parents. The operation therefore constitutes a concentration
       pursuant to Article 3 (1) b of the Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.     The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
       than EUR 5 billion4 (BCP: EUR 5,224 million; Interamerican: EUR 549 million).
       Each of BCP and Interamerican have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR
       250 million (BCP: EUR 4,748 million; Interamerican: EUR 546 million) but they do
       not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within
       one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community
       dimension. It does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement pursuant
       to Article 57 of that Agreement.
1   This company is a special purpose vehicle which is not strictly part of the Interamerican group. The
    Shareholders Agreement, however, defines Intercapital as being part of Interamerican group because it is
    controlled by Dimitris Contaminas, the same shareholder also controlling Interamerican.
2   This company is a subsidiary of BCP, which BCP has appointed as initial shareholder of BCP’s interest in
    NovaBank.
3   In addition to the agreement described above, the parties have entered into an additional agreement
    pursuant to which they introduce an amendment to the current Statute of NovaBank which will enter into
    force at the latest in December 2000. Under the new Statute, however, the parties will still have joint
    control since it also provides veto rights for both parties on strategic decisions.
4   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into
    EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                         2

V.   COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
Relevant product and geographical markets
8.    The joint venture will be primarily active in retail banking in Greece. The
      Commission in previous cases5 has defined the market of retail banking as comprising
      banking services to households which consist, for example, of deposits, lending, credit
      cards and mutual funds and other forms of asset management. Competition in retail
      banking still takes place on a national level (see for example the Commission’s
      decisions in case Comp/M. 1029-Merita/Nordbanken or in case Comp/M.1172-
      Fortis/GB) even if the introduction of a common currency and new technologies such
      as internet and telephone banking may widen the geographical scope of these services
      in the future.
9.    NovaBank will also be active in asset management: Pursuant to a separate agreement
      (“the Intertrust Agreement”) between Interamerican, Dimitri Contominas and
      NovaBank, Interamerican will transfer to NovaBank 50% of the issued share capital
      of Intertrust, a mutual fund management company belonging to the Interamerican
      group. Asset management services involve the marketing of unit trust and provision of
      portfolio management services provided for institutions and private individuals (see
      for example the Commission’s decision in the case Comp/M.611-Dresdner
      Bank/Kleinwort Benson; or Comp/M. 597-Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G. Warburg,
      etc.). The Commission in previous cases has considered that the market for asset
      management services is global in scope (see case No. IV/M.1043-B.A.T./Zurich).
10.   Within insurance, the Commission has distinguished between three main segments:
      non-life insurance, life insurance and reinsurance. Within non-life, it has identified as
      many products markets as there are risks insured (see Commission’s decisions in
      Comp/M. 1043-BAT/Zurich; or Comp/M.812-Allianz/Vereinte, etc.).
VI. ASSESSMENT
11.   The concentration hardly produces any overlaps. NovaBank will be active in retail
      banking in Greece. Neither of the parents is currently active in this market in Greece.
      Interamerican will transfer its asset management business to NovaBank. The parties’
      combined market share on an international and even European basis are, however,
      very limited and there are a number of important multinational groups active on that
      rather fragmented market (such as Barklays, Schroders, UBS, etc.). NovaBank will to
      a minor extent be engaged in insurance activities (general insurance and life
      insurance) in Greece. Interamerican has a market share in life insurance of 22%. The
      overlap will be minor: BCP has recently acquired Companhia de Seguros Império SA,
      which through a subsidiary has a minor presence in Greece, almost exclusively active
      in general ( non-life) insurance, where it has market shares of less than 1%.
12.   Interamerican will retain its activities in life-insurance and BCP in asset management.
      However, the concentration is not susceptible to lead to the co-ordination of the
      parents’ activities in these markets. As shown above, these activities will only be
5   See for instance case Comp/M. 1714-Föreningssparbanken/FI-Holding/FIH; or Case Comp/M. 1384-
    Deutsche Bank/Bankers Trust, etc.
                                                 3

      incidental to NovaBank’s main business which will be the provision of retail banking
      services.
VII. ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
13.   Pursuant to Article 17.1 of the Shareholders Agreement, BCP and Interamerican
      undertake that neither it nor its subsidiaries –except for insurance services- shall
      compete with NovaBank in Greece for the duration of the joint venture. Exceptions
      (Article 17.2) include investments in quoted companies of less than 5 % or the
      acquisition of a company not predominantly active in competing business (less than
      10% of that company’s turnover. This non-compete clause as regards its scope and
      geographic dimension can be regarded as directly related and necessary for the
      implementation of the concentration. Considering that the transaction involves the
      transfer of know-how and customer good-will, the non-compete clause can be
      considered to be necessary for a maximum duration of three years. The non-compete
      clause, however, cannot be considered ancillary in as far as it concerns purely
      financial interests of the sellers in competing businesses, even if these interests exceed
      10% (see for example Case Comp/M.301-Tesco/Catteau, par. 14).
VIII. CONCLUSION
14.   For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
      operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
      Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
      Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                         For the Commission,
                                                         (Signed : Mario MONTI
                                                         Member of the Commission)
                                                4
