                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 09. 10. 2000
In the published version of this decision, some                             PUBLIC VERSION
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                      MERGER PROCEDURE
general description.                                                 ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                    To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No COMP/M. 2158–Credit Suisse Group/Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette
Notification of 08.09.2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1. On 8 September 2000, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
     concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by which
     Credit Suisse Group acquires control of the whole of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette
     (‘DLJ’) by way of tender offer for the shares of DLJ. In a second stage Credit Suisse
     Group will purchase approximately 71% of DLJ’s shares from the current controlling
     shareholder AXA, the French insurer and asset manager. After examination of the
     notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified operation falls within the
     scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not raise serious doubts as to
     its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
     Agreement.
I.     THE OPERATION AND THE PARTIES
2. Credit Suisse Group, a publicly held corporation based in Switzerland, is a global
     financial services company and is the parent company of several wholly owned
     subsidiaries such as Credit Suisse, Credit Suisse First Boston and Winterthur Swiss
     Insurance company. Its activities encompass investment banking, private banking, asset
     management, (non)-life insurance and domestic banking for corporate and individual
     clients within Switzerland.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

3. DLJ is a publicly held U.S.-based investment bank and financial services provider.
    DLJ’s main activities are investment and merchant banking, asset management, financial
    advisory services, brokerage services, investment research, venture capital and securities
    underwriting. The focus of DLJ’s activities is in the U.S.
II.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
4. The Credit Suisse group and DLJ have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover in
    excess of € 5,000 million (Credit Suisse group, € 43 536 million; and DLJ, € 9 799
    million ). Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of € 250 million […],
    but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide
    turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a
    Community dimension. It does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA
    Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
III. CONCENTRATION
5. Following the acquisition of the controlling shares from AXA, DLJ will be merged into
    a Credit Suisse Group subsidiary. As stated above, Credit Suisse group will have sole
    control over DLJ at the completion of the transaction. The operation therefore
    constitutes a concentration within the meaning of article 3(1)b of the Council Regulation
    4064/89, of 21 December 1989.
IV.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
       A. Relevant product market(s)
6. The Commission has consistently segmented the banking sector into the following areas:
    retail banking, corporate banking, money markets, investment banking and other
    financial services.1 As already concluded in MeritaNordbanken/Unidanmark2, and
    confirmed by market investigation, it cannot be excluded that a further subdivision of
    these markets is relevant for the assessment of market conditions. The parties have not
    opposed to this approach.
7. Credit Suisse Group does not have retail banking operations outside Switzerland and
    DLJ has very limited corporate banking activities. The operation leads to overlaps in
    firstly investment banking activities, in particular Merger & Acquisition advice (M&A),
    initial public offerings (IPO’s) advice and equity and debt underwriting. Secondly the
    operation will give rise to an affected market for securities trading (equity and debt
    securities in the secondary market), as part of the money markets. These segments have
    been described by the Commission in Case No IV/M-597 Swiss Bank
    Corporation/S.G.Warburg, leaving open the question, whether these product segments are
    product markets in the strict sense.
8. For the purpose of the present case it is, however, not necessary to define conclusively
    the relevant product markets because, even on the narrowest market definition, the
    concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which
    effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part
    of that area.
1 Case IV/M.1172 – Fortis AG/Generale Bank and Case No IV/M.1910 – MeritaNordbanken/Unidanmark
2 Case IV/M.1910 – MeritaNordbanken/Unidanmark
                                                     2

      B. Relevant geographic markets
9. The notifying party considers the relevant geographic scope of the segments where the
    operation will create overlaps to be European, if not global since major players are
    competing for major issues all over the world. Such had indeed been concluded in
    previous Commission decisions for IPO’s and equity and debt underwriting3.
10. However, with regard to M&A advice and securities trading (equity- and debt securities in
    the secondary market), the Commission has generally taken the view that the services are
    required and supplied at national level, although many of these transactions are cross-
    border.
11. For the purpose of the present case it is not necessary to provide a definitive delimitation
    on the relevant geographic market since, on the basis of the assessment set out below, a
    dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the narrowest geographic
    market definition.
      C.     Assessment
12. Market shares in this industry are difficult to determine. As an alternative, investment
    bankers tend to rely on "league tables" that are designed to give an indication of relative
    market position and performance. Such league tables allocate proceeds to the lead manager
    or divide proceeds equally among co-managers. The Commission has previously
    considered this practice to adequately reflect the market power of parties.4
13. On the basis of league tables, the combined shares of the parties for equity underwriting
    ([5% - 10%]on EU basis and [5% - 10%] on a global basis) and IPO advice ([5% - 10%]
    on EU basis) do not raise competition concerns. Market investigation has indicated that
    the new entity would become the leader in high-yield bonds although its combined
    market share would remain below [5% - 10%] when a separate market with EU scope
    were to be defined.
14. Concerning securities trading in Greece, Credit Suisse Group would slightly reinforce
    (+[0% - 5%]) its leading position. However, with [20% - 30%] combined market share
    and strong competition from more than 25 internationally active players, the operation
    does not raise competitive concerns. Furthermore, the investigation did not show
    significant barriers to entry that could prevent any international bank from trading
    securities in Greece.
15. In M&A advice, and based on 1999 figures, the operation would lead to affected
    markets in Italy (combined [40% - 50%]), Ireland (combined [20% - 30%]) and Belgium
    (combined [20% - 30%]). However, when calculated over a period of three years, only
    Italy would be an affected market with a [10% - 20%] combined market share.
    Moreover, in both Italy and Ireland, a single deal accounted for more than two-thirds of
    the value attributed to DLJ in 1999. In Belgium, the market share addition represented
    by DLJ is minimal ([0% - 5%]). These figures show that the provision of Mergers &
    Acquisition advice is volatile, changing significantly from year to year. The limited
3 Case IV/M.597 – Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G. Warburg.
4 Case IV/M.642 - Chase Manhattan/Chemical Banking, , para. 13.
                                                      3

    number of large acquisitions and privatisation that international investment banks
    compete for in these markets imply highly concentrated but also highly volatile market
    positions.
16. Market investigation has confirmed that markets for M&A advisory services as well as
    underwriting services are competitive.5 Both services are generally provided on a
    project-by-project basis, and consequently, for a new project, a customer can switch
    supplier at no cost and is not in any way bound by his choice in previous projects. In
    addition, customers for M&A advisory services frequently use more than one advisor or
    even no advisor at all. In the underwriting business, using more than one investment
    bank is customary, and often preferred by the investment banks themselves, in order to
    spread the risks related to the issue of new securities.
V.      CONCLUSION
17. For the foregoing reasons, the proposed concentration does not raise serious doubts as to
    its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
    Agreement.
                                                                       For the Commission,
5    Other important competitors active in the affected markets, are UBS Warburg, Merryll Lynch, Morgan Stanley Dean
     Witter, J.P. Morgan, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Dresdner Kleinwort Benson, Salomon Smith Barney, Goldman
     Sachs, Lehman Brothers.
                                                                4
