                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 13/12/2000
                                                                     SG(2000) D/109231
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                           MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                        ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                     To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No IV/M. 2225- FORTIS /ASR
             Notification of 10.11.2000 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation Nr.
             4064/89.
1.     On 10.11.2000, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by which the
       Belgian/Dutch Fortis group ("Fortis") acquires control of the whole of the Dutch
       insurance company ASR Verzekeringsgroep N.V. ("ASR") by way of public bid
       published 15.11.2000 for the purchase of all shares and depositary receipts of shares not
       yet in its possession.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does
       not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
3.     The international financial services group FORTIS is jointly controlled by the two parent
       companies FORTIS (B) and FORTIS (NL). The main activities of Fortis are insurance,
       banking, investments and other financial services. Its operations are principally based
       in Belgium and the Netherlands, with a presence in other Member States. ASR is a
       Dutch insurance company also, to a minor extent, active in banking.
4.     Following the successful outcome of the public offer, ASR will be the holding
       company for all ASR and AMEV Nederland insurance companies in the Netherlands.
       The shares in ASR will be directly held by Fortis Insurance N.V., which is the holding
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

      company controlling most of the insurance interests held by the FORTIS group (other
      than the banking and insurance activities). The group companies of ASR (Stad
      Rotterdam Verzekeringen, De Amersfoortse Verzekeringen, Europeesche
      Verzekeringen, Woudsend Verzekeringen, Basic-life and ASR Bank), and the
      FORTIS companies involved (AMEV, AMEV Ardanta and Falcon Leven) will
      continue to operate under their own names.
II.     COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.   The Fortis group and ASR have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover in excess
     of € 5,000 million (Fortis, € 36.342,5 million; and ASR, € 2.132,6 million ). Each of
     them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of € 250 million (Fortis, € 29.804,3
     million and ASR, € 2.132,6 million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of
     their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
     The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension. It does not constitute a
     co-operation case under the EEA Agreement, pursuant to Article 57 of that Agreement.
III. CONCENTRATION
6. Upon completion of the transaction the Fortis group will have sole control over ASR,
    which will be merged with Fortis subsidiary AMEV Nederland. The operation therefore
    constitutes a concentration within the meaning of article 3(1)b of the Council
    Regulation 4064/89, of 21 December 1989.
IV.     COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
        A. Relevant product market(s)
7.   The activities of the Parties to the concentration overlap in the field of insurance and to a
     smaller extent, in the field of retail banking in the Netherlands.
        BANKING
8.   The Commission has consistently held that the services typically supplied by a
     universal bank may be divided into the following areas: retail banking, corporate
     banking and financial market services.1 In particular, the distinction between retail and
     corporate banking is relevant for the purposes of assessing market conditions (see Case
     M.1029 MERITA/NORDBANKEN).2
9.   By retail banking is meant banking services to households which consist, for example,
     of deposits, lending, credit cards and funds and other forms of asset management. By
     corporate banking is meant banking services to corporate clients which consist, for
     example, of deposits, lending, international payments, letters of credit and advice
     concerning mergers and acquisitions. With respect to financial markets the following
     activities may constitute distinct service markets: trading in equities, bonds, and
     derivatives, foreign exchange and money markets (i.e. treasury bills and commercial
     paper from banks and companies).
1 See, for example, Case IV/M.342 - Fortis/CGER and Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt.
2 Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt.
                                                      2

10. The parties' activities overlap in the banking segments of ordinary savings accounts
     (immediately callable) and mortgage loans only. For the purpose of the present case it
     is, however, not necessary to define conclusively the relevant product markets because,
     even on the narrowest market definition, the concentration does not create or
     strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
     significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
       INSURANCE
11. In the insurance sector a distinction is made between both life and non-life insurance
     and reinsurance. Reinsurance is a separate market because of its purpose of spreading
     risks between insurers. Life and non-life insurance can be divided into as many
     product markets as there are different kinds of risks covered. Their characteristics,
     premiums and purposes are distinct and there is typically no substitutability for the
     consumer between the different risks insured (see case IV/M. 812 - Allianz/Vereinte or
     case IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP). For the purpose of the present case it is, however, not
     necessary to define conclusively the relevant product markets as, even on the narrowest
     market definition, the concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position.
       B. Relevant geographic markets
       BANKING
12. The Commission has stated in previous cases3 that with regard to retail banking the
     relevant geographic market is to be considered national in scope due to the competitive
     conditions which in individual Member States are still different despite the increasing
     trend towards internationalisation, and due also to the importance of a network of
     branches. There are, however, indications that the present situation may change in the
     longer term with the introduction of the single currency and new technologies, e.g.
     internet and telephone banking. Investment banking and the financial markets have
     normally an international dimension.
13. However, whether the markets are considered to be national, European or global need
     not be finally decided in the present case because, on the basis of the assessment set
     out below, even on the narrowest market definition, the concentration does not create
     or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
     significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area.
       INSURANCE
14. The markets for life and non-life insurance are national as a result of national
     distribution channels, the established market structures, fiscal constraints and differing
     regulatory systems (see case M. 759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance). The markets for
     reinsurance are world wide in view of the need to pool risks on an international basis
     and the conduct of reinsurance business (see case M. 862 - Axa/UAP).
       C. Assessment
      BANKING
3 For example, Case IV/M.873 - Bank Austria/Creditanstalt and Case IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
                                                       3

15. In the Netherlands the new entity will hold less than 15 % of any market segment
    where their activities overlap: in the segment of ordinary savings accounts: 7,9%
    (Fortis: 7,5 % and ASR: 0,4%) and in the segment of mortgage loans 9,8 % (Fortis
    6,8% and ASR: 3%). In any case, the combined entity will be much smaller than other
    market players such as ABN AMRO, Rabobank or ING.
16. As a consequence, the operation will not create or strengthen a dominant position in
    the retail banking market in the Netherlands.
        INSURANCE
17. The Parties' activities in insurance overlap in life insurance as well as non-life
    insurance. The notifying Party identifies the following segments where overlaps exist:
    Total life, broken down in the segments: Life-individual, life-group, unit linked, and
    Non-Life, broken down in the segments: Motor, Fire, Transport, Health, and other.
18. In none of the segments of the Life insurance market, the combined market share of
     the Parties would exceed 15%. In Total Life, shares are 11,6% (Fortis: 7,2 % and
     ASR: 4,4%), in Life-individual, 12,4% (Fortis; 4,6 and ASR: 7,8), in Life-group:
     8,7% (Fortis: 7,5 and ASR: 1,2), in unit- linked 12,2% (Fortis: 9,5% and ASR: 2,7%).
     In all of theses segments, there are a number of other market players with market
     shares in a 5-15% range.
19. In the Non-life insurance market, where the combined share is 11% (Fortis: 5% and
     ASR: 6%), only in one segment the Parties' combined market share exceeds 15%, i.e.
     in the segment of Transport insurance. Here the combined share is 16% (Fortis: 10
     and ASR: 6%). In the other segments, shares are: Motor: 12% (Fortis: 6% and ASR:
     6%), Fire: 12 % (Fortis: 8% and ASR 4%), Health: 9% (Fortis: 2% and ASR: 7%) and
     other: 11% (Fortis: 6 and ASR 5%). In all of theses segments, there are a number of
     other market players with market shares in a 5-15% range.
     Transport Insurance
20. In the segment of Transport insurance, the new entity will be the largest actor in the
     Dutch market with a share of 16%. However, it is followed by four strong competitors
     with each around 7% market share, i.e. ING, AEGON and Delta Lloyd and the
     Nederlandse Luchtvaartpool.
     Further, there are four competitors each with between 4 and 6 % shares, five with each
     around 3 % share and a number of smaller competitors, the total being about 40
     competitors. This leaves a sufficient number of viable competitors on the Dutch
     market for Transport Insurance.
21. Under these circumstances it cannot be concluded that in the segment of Transport
     Insurance, the concentration creates or strengthens a dominant position as a result of
     which effective competition would be significantly impeded.
V.      CONCLUSION
22.   In view of the above, the concentration would not create or strengthen a dominant
      position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in
      the common market or in a substantial part thereof. For the above reasons, the
      Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and to declare it
                                                 4

compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
Regulation (EEC) N° 4064/89.
                                             For the Commission,
                                             (signed: Mario MONTI
                                             Member of the Commission)
                                       5
