                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
  In the published version of this decision, some
                                                                      Brussels, 27.07.2001
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article                          PUBLIC VERSION
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are                        MERGER PROCEDURE
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information                        ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.
                                                                      To the notifying party
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.2491-Sampo/Storebrand
                Notification of 26.06.2001 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 4064/891
I.      The notification
1.    On 26 June 2001, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration pursuant to
      Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/892 (“the Merger Regulation”) by which the
      Finnish undertaking Sampo Oyj (“Sampo”) acquires control of the whole of the Norwegian
      undertaking Storebrand ASA (“Storebrand”) by way of a public bid announced on 11 June 2001. As
      a result of the transaction, Sampo will also acquire joint control of If P&C Holding AB.
2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified operation
      falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 4064/89 and does not raise serious
      doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
II.     The parties and the operation
3.    Sampo is a Finnish full-service financial group providing banking, insurance and investment
      services to its customers principally in Finland. Storebrand and the members of the Storebrand
      group offer financial services in the areas of life insurance, banking and through If P&C Holding
      AB (“If P&C”)3, non-life insurance. If P&C is a Swedish joint venture currently owned 50/50 by
      Storebrand and a Swedish insurer Försäkringsaktiebolaget Skandia AB (“Skandia”). Storebrand
      operates mainly within Norway whilst If P&C conduct its operations principally in Sweden and
      Norway.
4.    By the notified operation, Sampo will acquire sole control over Storebrand. Conditional upon
      the successful completion of the acquisition of Storebrand, Sampo will transfer its property and
      casualty business to If P&C. As a result, Sampo will hold 67,52% and Skandia 32,48% of the
      capital and voting rights in If P&C. Pursuant to the Shareholders’ Agreement, Sampo and
1   OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by Regulation (EC)
    No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
2   OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by Regulation (EC)
    No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
3   Case IV/JV.21 – Skandia / Storebrand / Pohjola, Commission decision of 17.8.1999.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

     Skandia must nevertheless reach agreement on major decisions concerning the joint venture.
     Thus, Sampo and Skandia will exercise joint control in If P&C.
III.     Community dimension
5.   In 2000, Sampo achieved a world-wide turnover of € 4 339 million. In the same year, the world-
     wide turnover of Storebrand reached € 2 776 million. The combined aggregate world-wide
     turnover of the parties in the financial year 2000 thus exceeded € 5 000 million. The aggregate
     Community-wide turnover of each of the parties was more than € 250 million […]. The parties
     do not achieve more than two-thirds of their respective aggregate Community-wide turnover
     within one and the same Member State. According to Article 1 (2) of the Merger Regulation, the
     notified operation therefore has a Community dimension. Given that the turnover of Storebrand
     in Norway equals approximately 26% of the total turnover of the parties in the EEA territory,
     this case constitutes a co-operation case in accordance with Article 2 (a) of Protocol 24 to the
     EEA Agreement.
IV.    Concentration
6.   Upon completion of the proposed transaction Sampo will have sole control over Storebrand. In
     addition, as a result of having sole control over Storebrand, Sampo will replace Storebrand as a
     party in the joint venture If P&C, which it will then jointly control with Skandia. The operation
     therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1) (b) of the Merger
     Regulation.
V.     Relevant product and geographic markets
a)     Relevant product market(s)
7.   Sampo and Storebrand are both active in banking and financial services. As the Commission has
     consistently held, the banking services typically supplied by a universal bank are to be divided
     for merger control purposes basically into three areas: retail banking, corporate banking with
     non-banks and money market and securities business.4
8.   Sampo and Storebrand also have activities in life insurance. Life insurance can be divided into
     as many product markets as there are different kinds of risks covered. Their characteristics,
     premiums and purposes are distinct and there is typically no substitutability for the consumer
     between the different risks insured5.
9.   In addition, both Sampo and Storebrand have activities in several non-life insurance markets.
     For Storebrand, these activities are mainly provided through If P&C. Non-life insurance from
     the demand side, can be divided into as many product markets as there are types of insurance
     covering different kinds of risks. Their characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and
     there is typically no substitutability for the consumer between the different risks insured.6 On the
     other hand, the supply-side analysis shows that the conditions required in insuring different
4  See Case No IV/M.342 - Fortis/CGER, point 19; Case No IV/M.621 - BLG/BAWAG, point 13;
   Case NO IV/M.628 - Generale Bank/Crédit Lyonnais Nederland Bank.
5  See Cases IV/M.812 – Allianz/Vereinte, Commission decision of 11.11.1996; IV/M.862 – Axa/UAP,
   Commission decision of 20.12.1996.
6  See, for example, Cases IV/M.759 – Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance, Commission decision of 18.6.1996; IV/M.812
   – Allianz/Vereinte, Commission decision of 11.11.1996; IV/M.862 – Axa/UAP, Commission decision of
   20.12.1996; and COMP/M.2225 – Fortis /ASR, Commission decision of 13.12.2000.
                                                          2

     types of risks are very similar. This suggests that many different types of non-life insurance
     should be included in the same product market definition.7
10. In the present case, the notifying party suggest to divide the non-life insurance market in the
     following way, while submitting that the relevant product markets may be broader: Sweden -
     Accident & health, Commercial & real estate, Marine, aviation & transport (“MAT”) and
     Transport liability8. Finland - Motor vehicle liability, Land vehicles, Fire and other damages to
     property and General liability.
11. During the course of the Commission’s investigation it has been suggested by third parties that
     the non-life insurance products should be further subdivided into private and commercial
     insurance. In addition, it appears that the MAT insurance category may be further divided
     depending on the means of transport and the size of the risk (large commercial risks as opposed
     to insurance coverage sought by private vehicle owners).
12. For the purpose of the present case, however, it is not necessary to define conclusively the
     relevant product market(s), since on no alternative market definition considered would the
     concentration create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition
     would be significantly impeded in the EEA or in any substantial part of that area.
b)     Relevant geographic market(s)
13. With regard to retail banking, the Commission in the past has consistently decided that the
     competitive conditions in the individual Member States are still national due to a number of
     factors such as language differences, customer preferences for local suppliers, the significance of
     the network of branches and transaction costs.9 Certain banking services to large corporate
     customers as well as certain money market and securities operations are required and supplied
     on at least a Community-wide basis.10
14. As far as life insurance for private households are concerned, the relevant markets seem at present to
     be mainly national, in view of the established market structures, the need for adequate distribution
     channels, fiscal constraints and differing national regulatory systems.11
15. With respect to non-life insurance, the notifying party submits that the relevant geographic
     markets for the individual products are either national or at least EEA-wide in scope depending
     on the specific customer group. In addition, the notifying party considers that the marine,
     aviation & transport insurance segment is at least an EEA-wide market. This view has been
     supported by the Commission’s market investigation, which indicates that the relevant
     geographic market for MAT insurance is wider than national for large corporate customers and
     large risk insurance.
16. The Commission has in previous cases found that the geographical reference markets for non-
     life insurance markets are national as a result of national distribution channels, the established
     market structures, fiscal constraints and differing regulatory systems12 whereas the markets for
     reinsurance and the insurance of certain large risks are global13.
7  See footnote 2 above.
8  Transport liability can be regarded as a sub-segment of MAT insurance.
9  See Case No IV/M.342 - Fortis/CGER, point 23; Case No IV/M.391 - BAI/Banca Popolare di Lecco, point 9;
   Case IV/M.621 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse, points 6 and 9.
10 See Case No IV/M.596 - Mitsubishi Bank/Bank of Tokyo, point 9 et seq.; Case No IV/M.319 -
   BHF/CCF/Charterhouse, points 9 and 14; Case No IV/M.597 - Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G. Warburg, point 13
   et seq.
11 See Cases IV/M.759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance or IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP.
12 See, for example, Cases IV/M.759 – Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance, Commission decision of 18.6.1996 and
   COMP/M.2225 – Fortis /ASR, Commission decision of 13.12.2000.
13 See, for example, Case IV/M.862 – Axa/UAP, Commission decision of 20.12.1996.
                                                            3

17. It is, however, not necessary to decide upon the scope of the relevant geographical market14 for
      the purpose of the present case, because on the basis of the assessment set out below, there are
      no indications that the operation would give rise to competition problems regardless of how the
      market is defined.
VI.     Competitive assessment
Dominance
18. Although both parties are active in banking services they operate in different geographic areas
      (Sampo mainly operates in Finland, Storebrand in Norway). Consequently, the operation does
      not create any overlap with regard to most relevant markets, which can be regarded as national
      in scope (see also above). For those markets, which can be considered to have a wider
      geographic scope (e.g. certain corporate banking services and money market operations) the
      combined position of the parties on an EEA and global level is insignificant and does not raise
      any competition concerns. With respect to life insurance services, which are offered and sold at
      a national level (see above), the parties do not have any geographically overlapping activities in
      the EEA.15
19. The only markets for which the activities of Sampo and Storebrand overlap are for activities in
      some non-life insurance segments. Storebrand’s non-life insurance activities are mainly
      provided through If P&C and only to some limited extent outside this joint venture in Norway
      and Sweden. Sampo is mainly active in Finland and, to some extent, also in Sweden. However,
      Sampo is not active in Norway. As a result, the proposed transaction only leads to overlaps in
      the non-life insurance activities of Sampo and Storebrand (including If P&C) in Sweden and
      Finland. The impact of the proposed operation on these markets is assessed below.
a) National markets
20. The only countries in which the activities of Sampo and Storebrand lead to greater than 15%
      market shares in non-life insurance products are in Sweden and Finland.
(i)      Sweden
21. As regards the overlaps created in Sweden, the proposed operation is largely of complementary
      nature since Sampo has only a small presence in Sweden. In Sweden the combined market share
      of Sampo and If P&C in the market for Accident & Health insurance is [<15%], in the market
      for Commercial & Real Estate insurance [20-30]%, in the market for MAT insurance [30-40]%,
      in the market for Transport Liability [60-70]%16 and in the total market of non-life insurance
      [20-30]%.
22. Four major operators account for the bulk of the non-life insurance market in Sweden:
      Länsförsäkringar with a market share of 26.3%, Folksam with 21.8%, If P&C having [20-30]%
      and Trygg Hansa with a [10-20]% market share. If P&C is the third largest player in the overall
      non-life insurance market in Sweden. The market share addition deriving from the concentration
      – except for MAT insurance – is rather small and as a consequence the existing overall market
      structure in Sweden will not be substantially modified by the notified concentration.
23. Although If P&C will become a market leader in the MAT insurance segment in Sweden with an
      estimated market share of [30-40]% after the concentration, the company will continue to face
14  The market investigation in the present case did not support regional markets, like a Nordic market. However, this
    question can be left open since it does not influence the outcome of the competitive assessment.
15  Within the EEA Sampo exclusively operates in Finland, whereas Storebrand’s activities are confined to Norway
    and Sweden.
16  See footnote 8 above.
                                                                4

      significant competition from the other large Swedish insurance companies, in particular from
      Assuransföreningen, which the parties estimate to have a market share of 30.4% in Sweden. In
      addition, the parties face competition from large international insurance companies that are
      already present in the Swedish non-life insurance market, such as Zurich. All these companies
      are able to provide a competitive constraint on the business and they are also likely to be able to
      expand their coverage and presence in the markets concerned in Sweden.
24. According to the parties, the overall Transport Liability insurance market can be further
      subdivided into two different customer groups, which are large international companies insuring
      transportation of goods or other assets of very high value and small national companies. While
      competition for the former takes place at least at an EEA-wide level (see further below
      paragraph 30 ff.) competition for the latter takes place on a national level.
25. The total value of the small customer segment in Sweden is approximately € 11.5 million (year
      2000). This customer segment according to If P&C represents approximately [10-20]% of their
      total business volume in Transport liability. The combined market share of the parties in this
      segment is estimated at [20-30]%. Consequently, the increment arising from the proposed
      operation will be small. In addition, there are several other important competitors active in the
      Swedish market such as Trygg Hansa and Folksam. Market entry barriers are according to the
      parties, rather low. The market investigation did not reveal any competition concerns in this
      market segment.
26. On the overall market for Transport liability insurance the parties combined market shares is
      estimated at [60-70]% in Sweden. However, it has to be noted that the increment through the
      operation will be rather small and, more importantly, [a large share] of If P&C’s business in this
      market can be attributed to one large Swedish customer, […], which is a multinational
      corporation. If If P&C were to lose this customer, the market share would drop significantly.
(ii)      Finland
27. In Finland the combined market share of Sampo and If P&C in the market for Fire and other
      Damage to Property insurance is [30-40]%, in the market for General Liability insurance [30-
      40]% and in the total market of non-life insurance [30-40]%. If P&C did not initiate operations
      in Motor vehicle liability and Land vehicle insurance until 2001 through the recently acquired
      Swedish company Volvia. The market shares of Volvia in both Motor vehicle liability and Land
      vehicle insurance markets have been [<1%] in past two financial years.
28. Sampo has a strong position in the Finnish non-life insurance market. However, the present
      transaction does not significantly reinforce its position since If P&C has only minor activities in
      Finland and therefore the increase in market share as a result of the operation is minor ([<5%]
      irrespective of segmentation). In all of the insurance segments mentioned above, there are also a
      number of other important market players with market shares between 10% and 26%, such as
      Pohjola and Tapiola. In addition, Nordea recently entered the Finnish market by making the
      insurance products of Trygg-Baltica, the Danish insurance company in the Nordea Group,
      available for Finnish customers.
29. The Commission has examined the shares of the notifying party by taking each affected non-life
      product separately notwithstanding the possibility that the product markets may in fact be
      broader. The investigation concluded that the concentration would not raise serious doubts with
      regard to the creation or strengthening of a dominant position of Sampo/If P&C in Sweden or
      Finland.
(iii)     Impact on EEA and/or global markets
                                                       5

30. The parties’ market share on the MAT market on an EEA-wide or global market would be
     [<10%]. As regards the sub-segment of marine insurance the parties’ combined position would
     according to the information received by the Commission not exceed 15% [ ].17 In addition,
     there are number of international players active in the global MAT insurance market, such as for
     example Allianz AG, AXA/UAP or Zürich.
31. As regards Transport liability for large clients the total value of the EEA market in 2000
     amounted to € 6 000 million. This is the business If P&C is focussing on: approximately [the
     major part…]% of its overall sales in Transport liability in 2000 came from large clients. The
     sales of If P&C in 2000 amounted to […] representing [<5]% of the EEA market, while Sampo’s
     sales in 2000 generated from the same market segment amounted to [<5]%. At a global level, the
     parties’ combined market position will be even less important.
32. In view of the above considerations, the proposed operation will not raise serious doubts with
     regard to the creation or strengthening of a dominant position of the merged Sampo/Storebrand
     on any non-life insurance market irrespective of the market definitions chosen.
Article 2(4) aspects : co-ordination of competitive behaviour
33. As a result of the concentration Sampo will replace Storebrand in the joint venture If P&C with
     Skandia. Sampo and Skandia are both active in banking and life insurance markets which can be
     considered neighbouring and closely related markets to the non-life insurance markets where If
     P&C is active. In the Nordic countries Sampo is engaged in these activities only in Finland
     whereas Skandia is active in banking in Sweden and Norway and in life insurance business in
     Finland, Norway and Sweden.
34. In consequence, the only neighbouring product and geographical market where Sampo and
     Skandia are both active is the Finnish life insurance market.
35. The combined market share of Sampo and Skandia on the overall Finish life-insurance market is
     [20-30]%. This would rank the parent companies as the second largest player in the Finnish life
     insurance market, a position that Sampo already currently holds. Merita would clearly remain a
     market leader with a 42.3% market share. Moreover, there are other strong competitors in this
     market, such as Aurum with a 11.4% market share and Suomi-yhtiöt with a 11% share. In view
     of the market shares of the parent companies and the conditions of existing competition in the
     Finnish life insurance market, it appears that the parent companies do not have sufficient market
     power to eliminate competition in respect of a substantial part of the Finnish life-insurance
     market. Therefore, there appears to be no likelihood of co-ordination of competitive behaviour
     of the parties in the market concerned.
36. With regard to banking business, Storebrand and Skandia are both currently active in the
     banking market in Norway. However, since Sampo is active in banking only in Finland, the
     concentration will not change the previous situation18.
37. For the above reasons, irrespective of the market definitions chosen, the Commission’s
     investigation has given no indication that the current transaction will have as its object or effect
     the co-ordination of the competitive behaviour of Skandia and the merged entity on any of the
     markets where they both are active or on any closely related markets.
VII.    Action by the Norwegian authorities under Article 7(3) of Protocol 24 of the EEA
        Agreement
17 As regards aviation insurance (large risks) the parties do not have overlapping activities.
18 See further Case IV/JV.21 – Skandia / Storebrand / Pohjola.
                                                               6

38. In the context of the proposed concentration it has been brought to the attention of the
     Commission that the Norwegian Government may intend to apply provisions of national law,
     which could have the effect to prevent the proposed operation. Although no formal decision has
     yet been taken by the Norwegian authorities the Commission will closely monitor the
     compatibility with Article 7 of Protocol 24 to the EEA Agreement19 of the application of any
     national measures to the present operation.
39. Article 7(1) of Protocol 24 of the EEA Agreement provides that, “notwithstanding the sole
     competence of the EC Commission to deal with concentrations of a Community dimension,
     EFTA States may take appropriate measures to protect legitimate interests other than those taken
     into consideration according to the [Merger] Regulation”. Article 7(2) expressly enumerates
     three such legitimate interests, including prudential rules. By virtue of Article 7(3), any other
     public interest must be communicated to the EC Commission and shall be recognised by the
     Commission after an assessment of its compatibility with the general principles and provisions
     provided for in the EEA Agreement, before the measures may be taken. As regards the
     legitimate interests expressly listed, such as prudential rules, the Commission takes the view that
     these should be subject to a uniform interpretation, guided, where possible, by Community law
     in the field. Where there is doubt as to whether a public interest invoked by a State falls within
     one of the three categories listed in Article 7(2), the State concerned should communicate the
     public interest concerned to the Commission. Additional public interests, not listed in Article
     7(2), that motivate proposed national measures should also be communicated to the Commission
     for assessment of their compatibility with the Article 7 of Protocol 24 of the EEA Agreement.20
VIII. Conclusion
40. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and to
     declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
     This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No
     4064/89.
                                                                            For the Commission
                                                                                Mario MONTI
                                                                       Member of the Commission
19 As can be seen below, Article 7 of Protocol 24 of the EEA Agreement is broadly equivalent to Article 21(3) of
   the Merger Regulation and the Commission takes the view that it should be interpreted in the same way.
20 See also Case M. 1616-Antonio de Sommer Champalimaud/Banco Santander Hispano Central, S.A.
                                                           7
