                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                      Brussels, 12/11/2001
                                                                      SG(2001) D/292112
In the published version of this decision, some                             PUBLIC VERSION
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                        MERGER PROCEDURE
general description.                                                    ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                    To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case No COMP/M.2578 BANCO SANTANDER CENTRAL HISPANO/AKB
             Notification of 10/10/2001 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1. On 10.10.2001, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
     arising from the acquisition of AKB Holding GmbH (AKB), belonging to Märkische Bau-
     Union GmbH (MBU) by Banco Santander Central Hispano S.A. (Santander Central
     Hispano).
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
     operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
     doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA agreement.
THE PARTIES
3. Santander Central Hispano is a credit institution whose main activities are developed in
     Spain and Portugal, as well as in other EU Member States and Latin America. Its
     relatively minor activities in Germany are developed through its subsidiary CC Holding
     GmbH (CC Bank Holding) which controls CC Bank AG (CC Bank) and CC Leasing
     GmbH (CC leasing).
4. AKB is a holding company of a group focussed on the motor vehicle financing business
     mainly through its subsidiaries AKB Privat und Handelsbank AG and AKB Leasing
     GmbH. AKB Bank is mainly active in the operation of bank and stock market
     transactions of all types, with the exception of investment business, notably: motor
     vehicle selling loans, stock/purchasing loans for motor vehicle importers/dealers,
     investment loans for private and commercial users, deposit taking business, money
     transaction and mediation of insurance policies.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

THE OPERATION
5. The operation results from the agreement entered into by Santander Central Hispano and
    MBU - the sole shareholder of AKB - that sets out an irrevocable call option in favour of
    BSCH to acquire the total shares of AKB, which may be exercised at any time during the
    period from […]. The exercise of the said call option will confer Santander Central
    Hispano direct or indirect ownership of 100% of the shares of AKB. Likewise, MBU is
    granted an irrevocable put option to sell all AKB shares to Santander Central Hispano,
    which may be exercised during the period from […]. During the transition period from the
    signature of the agreement until the date of exercise of any of the put and call options, to the
    extent legally permissible and possible, MBU shall not take certain business operations and
    corporate actions without the prior written approval of Santander Central Hispano. Those
    operations include, among others, the determination of the new business and financing
    plans for 2002 and following years as well as […]. The approval of Santander Central
    Hispano shall not be withheld or delayed unreasonably.
6. The transaction, by which Santander Central Hispano intends to acquire sole control of the
    whole of AKB, is a concentration within the meaning of article 3(1) (b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
    than EUR 5 billion. Each Santander Central Hispano and AKB have a Community-wide
    turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (Santander Central Hispano €15 738 million;
    AKB €446million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
    Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified
    operation therefore has a Community dimension.
COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
Relevant product market
8. Following the practice of the Commission assessing cases in the banking sector, there are
    three major market segments: Retail banking, Corporate Banking and Financial Markets.
9. By retail banking is meant banking services to households which consist, for example, of
    deposits, lending, credit cards and mutual funds and other forms of asset management. By
    corporate banking is meant banking services to corporate clients which consists, for
    example, of deposits, lending, international payments, letters of credit and advice
    concerning mergers and acquisitions. With respect to financial markets the following
    activities may constitute distinct service markets: trading in equities, bonds, and
    derivatives, foreign exchange and money markets (i.e. treasury bills and commercial paper
    from banks and companies). It cannot be excluded that a further subdivision of retail
    banking, corporate banking and financial market services is relevant for the assessment of
    market conditions. However, for the purposes of this decision, it is not necessary to
    define the relevant product markets since irrespective of the precise definition to be
    adopted, the assessment of the notified concentration would not change.
Relevant geographic market
10. From the geographical point of view, the activities of the retail banking sector have been
    traditionally considered national in scope, due to the competitive conditions which in
    individual member states are still different and the importance of local presence (network
                                                     2

    branches). With regard to the market for corporate banking, the Commission has generally
    taken the view that certain product segments continue to be required and supplied at
    national level. However, some sectors of corporate banking seem to have a more
    international dimension. In this respect, the relevant geographic market appears to be
    national for small and medium-sized corporate clients and international for large corporate
    clients1. Finally, as regards financial market services, the Commission considers that the
    relevant geographic market appears to be international in scope2. For the purposes of this
    decision it is not necessary to define the relevant geographic markets, since irrespective
    of the precise definition to be adopted, the assessment of the notified concentration
    would not change.
Assessment
11. The parties do not have any overlapping activities other than in Germany in retail banking
    and corporate banking. As regards retail banking the combined market share of the parties
    is well below 10% in any possible market definition with the exception of the narrowest
    possible one, namely consumer credit for motorcycles where the combined market share of
    the parties is around 29%. The market share of the parties for corporate banking is
    negligible in any possible market definition (less than 2%).
12. Therefore, the proposed transaction does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a
    result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any
    substantial part of that area.
CONCLUSION
13. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC)
    No 4064/89.
                                                            For the Commission,
                                                            Mario Monti
                                                            Member of the Commission
1   See case IV M. 1029 Merita/Nordbanken.
2   See case IV M. 938 Bacob Banque/Banque Paribas Belgique
                                                    3
