                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                      Brussels, 23/10/2001
                                                                      SG (2001) D/291904
In the published version of this decision, some                             PUBLIC VERSION
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                          MERGER PROCEDURE
other confidential information. The omissions are                       ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
                                                                      To the notifying party
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.2577 - GE CAPITAL/HELLER FINANCIAL
                Notification of 21.09.2001 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 4064/891
1.     On 21 September 2001, the Commission received notification of a proposed
       concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by which
       the undertaking General Electric Capital Corporation (“GE Capital”) acquires within the
       meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control of the whole of the
       undertaking Heller Financial, Inc (“Heller”).
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
       doubts as to its compatibility with the common market.
I.     THE PARTIES
3.     GE Capital is the holding company for the global diversified financial services division
       of General Electric Company (“GE”). GE is a diversified manufacturing, technology
       and services company, incorporated in New York with its headquarters in Stamford,
       Connecticut, USA. The shares of GE are listed on several stock exchanges, including
       those of New York, Boston and London. GE is active in various fields including
       aircraft engines, appliances, financial services, information services, power generation
1    OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
     Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

      equipment, lighting, industrial systems, medical systems, plastics, broadcasting and
      transportation equipment.
4.    Heller is a US-based commercial finance company providing a broad range of
      financing solutions. Its activities include working capital loans, equipment financing
      and leasing, cash-flow financing, collateral-based financing and small business
      lending. Heller generates approximately [>50]% of its revenues in the USA.
II.   THE OPERATION
5.    The proposed operation involves the acquisition of sole control by GE over Heller by
      way of purchase of shares.
III. CONCENTRATION
6.    The concentration concerns the acquisition by GE of sole control of Heller. The
      proposed transaction therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article
      3(1)(b) of the Regulation 4064/89, the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
      than EUR 5 billion2. Each of GE and Heller have a Community-wide turnover in
      excess of EUR 250 million, but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
      aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The
      notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
8.    In the EEA, GE Capital and Heller are both engaged in the provision of commercial
      finance, and the transaction generates overlaps in the following types of commercial
      finance: factoring (a form of working capital finance), private equity finance and
      equipment finance. The parties have submitted that the transaction only gives rise to
      affected markets in the area of factoring. Neither GE nor Heller has significant market
      share in private equity finance.
      A.          Relevant Product Markets
      i.          Working Capital Finance / Factoring
9.    Both parties are active in the provision of working capital finance to small and medium
      sized enterprises (“SMEs”). This category of finance encompasses those forms of
      finance that provide liquidity and other services that enable a business to fund its
      running expenses, such as rent, payroll, raw materials, advertising and other overheads.
      Working capital finance can be provided through a wide range of means including
      bank lines of credit, venture capital, equity injections, mortgages on property, extended
      supplier credit, unsecured loans and loans secured against or linked to a range of assets
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated
    into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                         2

    including receivables (debts owed to a business). The parties submit that most
    businesses will employ simultaneously a mix of different forms of working capital
    finance to fund their activities.
10. Factoring is a form of lending against receivables. At its most basic it involves a
    business (“the client”) contracting to assign some or all of the invoices for sales made
    to its customers to a factoring company. In return the factoring company provides one
    or more of the following: (i) a prepayment or advance on the value of the invoices; (ii)
    invoice collection and sales ledger management services; and (iii) credit insurance
    protecting the client against a customer’s inability to pay an invoice within a period of
    time.
11. The notifying party has submitted that the factoring services of the parties form part of
    the provision of corporate banking services, as the lending or advancement of funds is
    the central component of such financing. In a previous decision3 the Commission
    examined factoring but reached no final decision on the precise boundaries of the
    relevant product market. Likewise for the purposes of this decision it is not necessary
    to reach a firm view on the relevant product market, since whether a wider market for
    working capital finance or a narrower product market of factoring is defined, the
    concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which
    effective competition would be significantly impeded in the common market or a
    substantial part of it.
    ii         Equipment Finance
12. Both parties are active in the provision of finance to enable business customers to
    acquire the use of a wide range of assets, ranging from office equipment, IT and
    telecoms equipment, through to medical equipment and to aircraft and airport and
    ground handling equipment. Methods of equipment financing include outright cash
    purchase, loans and other forms of credit provided by banks and other financial
    arrangements that might be offered by financial institutions and other finance
    companies.
13. The notifying party has submitted that the relevant market for these services
    incorporates all methods by which customers seek to acquire the use of assets.
    Furthermore, the notifying party submits that it would not be appropriate to analyse the
    markets on the basis of the different types of equipment.4
14. For the purposes of this decision it is not necessary to define the precise delineation of
    the relevant market(s), as the combination of the parties’ activities does not create or
    strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
    significantly impeded in the common market or a substantial part of it, however the
    markets are defined.
3  IV/M.1661 – Crédit Lyonnais / Allianz-Euler/JV, 26.08.1999
4  The Commission examined specialist financing services in two previous cases involving GE (IV/M.659 -
   GE Capital/Sovac, 17.11.1995 and IV/M.1018 – GE Capital/Woodchester, 7.11.1997).
                                                       3

    iii        Private Equity Investment
15. Private equity in its widest sense describes equity investments in unquoted companies
    (i.e. companies whose shares are not quoted on any public exchange). The supply of
    funds for equity investment can comprise equity and debt finance. While it may be
    possible to consider the supply of debt and equity finance to be separate relevant
    markets within equity finance, for the purposes of this decision it is not necessary to
    define the precise delineation of the relevant market(s), as the combination of the
    parties’ activities does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which
    effective competition would be significantly impeded in the common market or a
    substantial part of it, however the markets are defined.
    B.         Relevant Geographic Markets
    i          Working Capital Finance / Factoring
16. The Commission has recognised in previous cases that certain commercial finance and
    lending activities have historically been linked to national geographic markets5. In
    addition it has noted that the relevant geographic market for corporate finances tends to
    be national for services to SMEs but international in scope for large corporate clients.
17. In relation to the narrower possible market definition of factoring, the notifying party
    has stated in its notification that factoring has traditionally been provided on a national
    basis and that the parties’ factoring operations in the EEA are focused on business
    within the countries in which their respective local subsidiaries are active. As factoring
    services are generally provided to SMEs, the notifying party has indicated that
    relatively few factoring customers are of sufficient size to warrant cross-border
    consumption of factoring services. The provision of factoring services to those that do
    generate turnover outside their home country is largely done through referrals to
    factoring companies in the foreign country (known as “export” factoring).
18. For the purposes of this decision it is not necessary to reach a firm view on the relevant
    geographic market, since whether a wider than national market or national geographic
    markets are defined, the concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant
    position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in
    the common market or a substantial part of it.
    ii         Equipment Finance
19. In a number of previous decisions the Commission has noted that the geographical
    dimension of competition is national for many aspects of corporate finance and lending
    services to SMEs6, but that it may be wider than national for lending services to larger
    corporations.
20. The notifying party has stated that SMEs trend to deal with financial institutions
    located close to their place of business, but that there are certain types of assets (for
5  For example, IV/M.1661 – Crédit Lyonnais/Allianz-Euler/JV; COMP/M.1910 - Meritanordbanken /
   Unidanmark, 10.04.2000
6  For example, IV/M.1018 – GE Capital/Woodchester, 7.11.1997 and COMP/M.1910 - Meritanordbanken /
   Unidanmark, 10.04.2000
                                                    4

    example, commercial and business aircraft) the use of which tends to be sought only by
    large corporate clients. Large corporate clients may also seek to acquire the use of
    those assets from foreign vendors, therefore this business tends to be conducted at a
    trans-national level. Similarly, for those lending services which are arranged by
    vendors, the vendor may seek to develop arrangements with financiers whereby the
    financiers will be a specific source of financing for their end user customers in more
    than one country.
21. For the purposes of this decision it is not necessary to reach a firm view on the relevant
    geographic market for equipment finance, since whether a wider than national market
    or national geographic markets are defined, the concentration does not create or
    strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
    significantly impeded in the common market or a substantial part of it, however the
    markets are defined.
    iii          Private Equity Investment
22. As for the financial services discussed previously in this decision, the geographic
    market could be considered to be either national or wider. However, for the purposes
    of this decision it is not necessary to reach a firm view on the relevant geographic
    market for private equity investment, since whether a wider than national market or
    national geographic markets are defined, the concentration does not create or
    strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
    significantly impeded in the common market or a substantial part of it, however the
    markets are defined.
    C.           Impact of the Concentration
    i            Working Capital Finance / Factoring
23. On the basis of national markets for factoring the parties have overlapping activities in
    three countries: the UK, France and Germany.
24. In the UK the parties would have a combined market share of [5-10]% (GE [0-5]%;
    Heller [0-5]%)7. There are over 70 suppliers of factoring services in the UK8, including
    Barclays Bank ([5-10]%), Lloyds TSB ([10-15]%), HSBC ([10-15]%), GMAC ([10-
    15]%) and RBS/Natwest ([20-30]%).
25. In France the parties would have a combined market share of [20-30]% (GE [0-5]%,
    Heller [15-25]%). In France there are at least 39 factoring companies. One competitor
    is of an almost identical size (Eurofactor – Crédit Lyonnais/Euler with [20-30]%),
    another (Caisse d’Epargne) with [10-15]%, and four competitors with around 5%
    market shares. In France, the average annual growth rate over the last three years has
    been [10-20]%.
26. In Germany the parties will have a combined market share of [20-30]% (GE [5-10]%;
    Heller [10-20]%). The combined entity will continue to face competition from two
7  Source: UK Factors and Discounters Association
8  Estimates of the number of factoring companies are taken from Factors Chain International
                                                        5

    banks (Deutsche Bank and DG Bank) with market shares of [10-20]% and [10-20]%
    respectively as well as from four companies with market shares between [5]% and
    [10]%. In total there are estimated to be at least 20 companies providing factoring
    services in Germany. In Germany, the average annual growth rate over the last three
    years has been [10-20]%.
27. The parties submit that there is no vertically affected market upstream or downstream
    of their factoring activities.
28. In relation to the wider possible market of working capital finance, the notifying party
    has been unable to obtain reliable estimates of the total volume of working capital
    finance on either an EEA or national level. Nevertheless, GE Capital estimates that the
    proportion of working capital finance that is represented by factoring in the EEA or on
    a Member State basis is likely to be in the region of 1-2%. As the parties’ factoring
    operations represent the vast majority of their working capital operations the parties’
    combined share of working capital finance will be very small and will not raise
    competition concerns.
29. The proposed concentration therefore does not create or strengthen a dominant position
    as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the
    common market or a substantial part of it in relation to the provision of working capital
    finance / factoring in the EEA or any Member State therein.
    ii         Equipment Finance
30. GE has a number of businesses in Europe that provide financing to enable customers to
    acquire the use of assets. Those that undertake activities which compete directly with
    Heller in Europe are European Equipment Finance (“EEF”), GE Capital Aviation
    Services (“GECAS”), GE Capital Corporate Aircraft Group (“GECCAG”) and GE
    Engine Leasing (“GEEL”). EEF is active primarily in the UK, France, Germany and
    the Nordic Countries and conducts its business with customers through its relationships
    with equipment manufacturers, equipment dealers and distributors and by developing
    relationships directly with end customers. Heller, through its Global Vendor Finance
    Business provides finance to SMEs to enable them to acquire the use of various types
    of information technology and telecommunications equipment. Heller also has a
    Commercial Equipment Finance business which operates through a newly-formed
    associated partnership with a major financial institution in the UK (“Partnership”)
    which focuses on higher-value assets.
31. On the basis of information provided to the Commission by the notifying party in
    relation to the parties’ combined share of financing of business equipment, the parties’
    have overlapping activities in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the
    Netherlands, Sweden and the UK9. However, in none of these countries did the
    combined market share exceed 15%, and the increment is only greater than 1% in the
    UK. The horizontal overlaps therefore raise no concerns that the concentration may
    create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective competition
    would be significantly impeded in the common market or a substantial part of it in
    relation to the provision of equipment finance in the EEA or any Member State therein.
9  Source: The Finance and Leasing Association (“FLA”) and LeaseEurope, Finansbolagers forening, Dutch
   Leasing Association and World Leasing Yearbook
                                                    6

32. In order to assess the potential competitive impact of this transaction on vertically
    related markets, the parties have performed a review of their manufacturing activities
    where they might have a share of more than 25%. While Heller has no such activities,
    the only products in respect of which GE provides finance to customers and in respect
    of which it may have a share of 25% or more are certain medical equipment and
    aircraft engines.
33. As far as medical equipment is concerned, Heller has not provided and had, according
    to the notifying parties, no plans to provide finance to enable customers to acquire the
    use of such equipment. The addition of Heller to GE Capital should therefore bear no
    competitive effect as a result of which effective competition in the medical equipment
    sector would be significantly impeded in the Common Market or a substantial part of
    it.
34. On the market for large commercial and regional jet aircraft engine, the Commission
    agrees with the parties’ submission that the combination of GE Capital's commercial
    aircraft financing activities through GECAS with Heller's Aircraft Finance Division
    ("HAFD") will not strengthen GECAS's competitive position and therefore bear no
    impact on the respective engine markets. This situation is due to Heller's de minimis
    role in aircraft financing and resulting minimal increment to GECAS's share.
35. Similarly to aircraft financing activities, Heller's very small amount of commercial
    aircraft engine leasing will not materially affect GE's position as a engine lease
    provider, through GEEL, the joint offering of GECAS and GE Aircraft Engines
    ("GEAE"), so as to impact GEAE's position on the market for large commercial and
    regional jet aircraft engines.
36. In the light of the above, neither the horizontal nor the vertical relationships brought
    about by this concentration raise concerns that it may create or strengthen a dominant
    position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in
    the common market or a substantial part of it in relation to the provision of equipment
    finance in the EEA or any Member State therein.
    iii         Private Equity Investment
37. The European private equity sector is valued at approximately EUR [60-80] billion, of
    which debt finance is estimated to account for EUR 40-50 billion10. Of the total Europe
    private equity sector, debt-financed transactions taking place in the UK account for
    around EUR 20-25 billion11.
38. The only national market to be considered is the UK. However, whether the market is
    considered to be that for the provision of debt finance, equity finance, or both, neither
    of the parties has a market share which exceeds 1% whether considered on a EU-wide
    or UK-wide basis. The concentration therefore raises no concerns as to the creation or
    strengthening of a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would
    be significantly impeded in the common market or a substantial part of it in relation to
    the provision of private equity investment in the EEA or any Member State therein.
10 Source: CMBOR
11 Estimate by Heller based on an analysis of the CMBOR Summer 2001 Review.
                                                      7

VI. CONCLUSION
39. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                  For the Commission
                                                  Mario MONTI
                                                  Member of the Commission
                                             8
