                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                      Brussels, 18/12/2001
                                                                      SG (2001) D/292916
 In the published version of this decision, some
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information                            MERGER PROCEDURE
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                    ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
 general description.
To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.2676 – SAMPO/VARMA SAMPO/IF HOLDING/JV
                Notification of 19/11/2001 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 4064/891
I.        THE OPERATION
1.        On 19 November 2001, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
          concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/892 by which
          the undertakings Sampo plc (“Sampo”; SF), Varma Sampo Mutual Pension Insurance
          Company (“Varma Sampo”; SF), Försäkringsbolaget Skandia AB (“Skandia”; S) and
          Storebrand ASA (“Storebrand”; N) acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the
1    OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
     Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
2         OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
          Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

          Council Regulation joint control of the undertaking If Skadeförsäkring Holding AB (“If
          P&C Holding”; S) by way of purchase of shares.
2.        By letter of 27 November 2001, a reasoned request for a derogation from the
          obligation, imposed by Article 7.1. of Council Regulation No. 4064/893 (“the
          Merger Regulation”), was lodged to the Commission's services by Sampo and If
          P&C Holding. By decision According to Article 7 (4) of the Regulation of 30
          November 2001 the Commission decided to grant a derogation from suspension for
          certain acts of implementation.
3.        After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
          notified operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 4064/89
          and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and
          with the EEA Agreement.
II.     THE PARTIES
4.        Sampo is a Finnish full-service financial group providing banking, insurance and
          investment services to its customers principally in Finland.
5.        Storebrand and the members of the Storebrand group offer financial services in the
          areas of life insurance, banking and through If P&C Holding AB (“If P&C”)4, non-
          life insurance.
6.        If P&C is a Swedish joint venture currently owned 50/50 by Storebrand and the
          Swedish insurer Försäkringsaktiebolaget Skandia AB (“Skandia”). Storebrand
          operates mainly within Norway whilst If P&C conduct its operations principally in
          Sweden and Norway.
7.        Varma Sampo is a Finish mutual employment pension insurance company providing
          statutory employment pension insurances that are legally required to be provided by
          employers to their employees as well as by private entrepreneurs. Approximately
          97% of Varma Sampo’s shares are held by the policyholders and insured persons,
          the remaining 3% is owned by Sampo.
III.      THE CONCENTRATION
8.        According to the three main agreements (Shareholders Agreement, Subscription
          Agreement, Variation Agreement5) concluded between the parties on the 8
3    OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrected version OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13, as last amended by Regulation
     (EC) No 1310/97, OJ L 180, 9.7.1997, p. 1, corrigendum in OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17.
4     Case IV/JV.21 – Skandia / Storebrand / Pohjola, Commission decision of 17.8.1999.
5    According to an Agreement signed between Sampo, Storebrand and Skandia on 20 May 2001 Sampo had
     originally intended to take over Storebrand (Case Comp7M.2491-Sampo/Storebrand). The decision of 27
     July 2001 clearing this transaction also covered the transfer of Sampo’s property and casualty insurance
     businesses to If P&C. The Sampo/Storebrand transaction was aborted in September 2001. The present
     agreements implement part of the original deal as far as it relates to the restructuring of If P&C.
                                                       2

         November 2001 Sampo and Varma Sampo will both acquire shareholdings in If
         P&C of 38.05% and 10.06% respectively, corresponding to 39.54% and 10.46% of
         the voting rights. Together with he existing shareholders Skandia and Storebrand
         (each holding 25% of the voting rights) they will take strategic business decisions
         concerning If P&C, which require the approval of all shareholders in the General
         Meeting of Shareholders or the approval of the majority of Board of Directors (five
         members), at least one of whom has been appointed by each shareholder. Thus,
         Sampo, Varma Sampo, Skandia and Storebrand will exercise joint control in If P&C.
         The notified transaction therefore constitutes a concentration according to Article 3
         (1) b of the Regulation.
IV.      COMMUNITY DIMENSION
9.       The notified transaction has Community dimension: The undertakings concerned
         have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more than EUR 5 billion6.
         Sampo, Varma Sampo, Skandia and If P&C Holding have a Community-wide
         turnover in excess of EUR 250 million. The parties do not achieve more than two-
         thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same
         Member State. Given that Skandia, Storebrand and If P&C Holding have a turnover
         exceeding 250 million EUR in Norway, the notified operation constitutes a
         cooperation case under Protocol 24 Article 2 par. 1 lit. b) to the EEA Agreement.
V.     COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
a)     Relevant product market(s)
10.      Sampo, Skandia and Storebrand are active in banking and financial services. Varma
         Sampo is not engaged in the general banking business but provides a limited amount
         of loans exclusively to its customer companies. As the Commission has consistently
         held, the banking services typically supplied by a universal bank are to be divided
         for merger control purposes basically into three areas: retail banking, corporate
         banking with non-banks and money market and securities business.7
11.      Sampo, Skandia and Storebrand also have activities in life insurance. Varma Sampo
         is not operating in the life insurance markets. Life insurance can be divided into as
         many product markets as there are different kinds of risks covered. Their
6   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated
    into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
7    See Case No IV/M.342 - Fortis/CGER, point 19; Case No IV/M.621 - BLG/BAWAG, point 13;
     Case NO IV/M.628 - Generale Bank/Crédit Lyonnais Nederland Bank.
                                                      3

        characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and there is typically no
        substitutability for the consumer between the different risks insured8.
12.     Sampo and If P&C have overlapping activities in non-life insurance.9 In past
        decisions the Commission has held that non-life insurance from the demand side can
        be divided into as many product markets as there are insurances covering different
        kinds of risks since their characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and
        there is typically no substitutability for the consumer for the risks insured (see for
        instance case Comp/M.759-Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance or Cop/M.862-
        AXA/UAP). The Commission has found on the contrary that from a supply-side
        perspective the conditions for insurance of different risk types are quite similar and
        most large insurance companies are active in several risk types. This suggests that
        many different types of non-life insurance should be included in the same product
        market definition.
13.     In the present case, the notifying party suggest to divide the non-life insurance
        market in the following way, while submitting that the relevant product markets may
        be broader: Sweden - Accident & Health, Commercial & Real estate, Marine,
        Aviation & Transport (“MAT”) and Transport Liability10. Finland –Fire and other
        damages to property, General Liability, Motor Vehicle Liability and Land Vehicles.
14.     It cannot be excluded that the above-mentioned non-life insurance products should
        be further subdivided into private and commercial insurance. In addition, it appears
        that the MAT insurance category may be further divided depending on the means of
        transport and the size of the risk (large commercial risks as opposed to insurance
        coverage sought by private vehicle owners). 11 According to the parties, the overall
        Transport Liability insurance market can be further subdivided into two different
        customer groups, which are large international companies insuring transportation of
        goods or other assets of very high value and small national companies.
15.     For the purpose of the present case, however, it is not necessary to define
        conclusively the relevant product market(s), since on no alternative market
        definition considered would the concentration create or strengthen a dominant
        position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in
        the EEA or in any substantial part of that area.
b)    Relevant geographic market(s)
16.     With regard to retail banking, the Commission in the past has consistently decided
        that the competitive conditions in the individual Member States are still national due
        to a number of factors such as language differences, customer preferences for local
        suppliers, the significance of the network of branches and transaction costs.12
8    See Cases IV/M.812 – Allianz/Vereinte, Commission decision of 11.11.1996; IV/M.862 – Axa/UAP,
     Commission decision of 20.12.1996.
9   Varma Sampo is not active in non-life insurance.
10   Transport liability can be regarded as a sub-segment of MAT insurance.
11  See decision in Case Comp/M.2491-Sampo/Storebrand, par. 11.
12  See Case No IV/M.342 - Fortis/CGER, point 23; Case No IV/M.391 - BAI/Banca Popolare di Lecco,
    point 9; Case IV/M.621 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse, points 6 and 9.
                                                      4

        Certain banking services to large corporate customers as well as certain money
        market and securities operations are required and supplied on at least a
        Community-wide basis.13
17.     As far as life insurance for private households is concerned, the relevant markets seem
        at present to be mainly national, in view of the established market structures, the need
        for adequate distribution channels, fiscal constraints and differing national regulatory
        systems.14
18.     The Commission has in previous cases found that the geographical reference
        markets for most non-life insurance markets are national as a result of national
        distribution channels, the established market structures, fiscal constraints and
        differing regulatory systems15 whereas the markets for reinsurance and the insurance
        of certain large risks are global16.
19.     The notifying party submits that the relevant geographic markets for the individual
        products are either national or at least EEA-wide in scope depending on the specific
        customer group. In addition, the notifying party considers that the MAT and
        transport liability segments are an EEA-wide market. The Commission’s market
        investigation has indicated that the relevant geographic markets for transport
        liability and MAT insurance and could at least be wider than national for large
        corporate customers and large risk insurance respectively.
20.     It is, however, not necessary to decide upon the scope of the relevant geographical
        market17 for the purpose of the present case, because on the basis of the assessment
        set out below, there are no indications that the operation would give rise to
        competition problems regardless of how the market is defined.
VI.    ASSESSMENT
Dominance
21.     If P&C is active only in non-life insurance business, mainly in the Nordic countries
        Finland and Sweden. Sampo is active in non-life insurance across Europe, but with a
        strong focus on Finland. Varma Sampo is not active in non-life insurance. The
        proposed transaction only leads to overlaps in the non-life insurance activities of
        Sampo and If P&C in Sweden and Finland. The impact of the proposed operation on
        these markets is assessed below.
13  See Case No IV/M.596 - Mitsubishi Bank/Bank of Tokyo, point 9 et seq.; Case No IV/M.319 -
    BHF/CCF/Charterhouse, points 9 and 14; Case No IV/M.597 - Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G. Warburg,
    point 13 et seq.
14  See Cases IV/M.759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance or IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP.
15  See, for example, Cases IV/M.759 – Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance, Commission decision of 18.6.1996
    and COMP/M.2225 – Fortis /ASR, Commission decision of 13.12.2000.
16  See, for example, Case IV/M.862 – Axa/UAP, Commission decision of 20.12.1996.
17  The market investigation in the present case did not support regional markets, like a Nordic market.
    However, this question can be left open since it does not influence the outcome of the competitive
    assessment.
                                                    5

a) National markets
22.     The only countries in which the activities of Sampo and If P&C lead to greater than
        15% market shares in non-life insurance products are in Sweden and Finland.
(i)     Sweden
23.     As regards the overlaps created in Sweden, the proposed operation is largely of
        complementary nature since Sampo has only a small presence in Sweden. In Sweden
        the combined market share of Sampo and If P&C in the market for Accident &
        Health insurance is [less than 10 %], in the market for Commercial & Real Estate
        insurance [20-30 %], in the market for MAT insurance [30-40 %], in the market for
        Transport Liability [60-70 %]18 and in the total market of non-life insurance
        [15-25 %].
24.     Four major operators account for the bulk of the non-life insurance market in
        Sweden: Länsförsäkringar with a market share of [20-30 %], Folksam with
        [15-25 %], If P&C having [15-25 %] and Trygg Hansa with a [10-20 %] market
        share. If P&C is the third largest player in the overall non-life insurance market in
        Sweden. The combined market shares give rise to no concern in accident and health,
        commercial & real estate and or on an overall market for non-life insurance.
25.     The situation in MAT insurance and transport liability merits closer examination.
        Although If P&C will become a market leader in MAT insurance in Sweden with an
        estimated combined market share of [30-40 %] after the concentration, the company
        will continue to face significant competition from the other large Swedish insurance
        companies, in particular from Assuransföreningen, which the parties estimate to
        have a market share of [25-35 %] in Sweden. In addition, the parties face
        competition from large international insurance companies that are already present in
        the Swedish non-life insurance market, such as Zürich. All these companies are able
        to provide a competitive constraint on the business and they are also likely to be able
        to expand their coverage and presence in the markets concerned in Sweden.
26.     On the overall market for Transport liability insurance the parties combined market
        shares is estimated at [60-70 %] in Sweden. The increment through the operation
        will be relatively small and will not, in any event, be as great as it seems at first
        sight. Sampo does not actively provide Transport liability insurance in Sweden
        except via the recently acquired Swedish company Atlantica. Sampo however is
        currently planning to run down this business completely. Moreover, [a large share]
        of If P&C’s business in this market can be attributed to one large Swedish customer,
        […], which is a multinational corporation. If If P&C were to lose this customer, its
        market share would drop significantly. It has to be noted that contracts in transport
        liability are usually short term and are awarded as the result of a competitive bidding
        process, where If P&C will face competition from other large providers such as
        Trygg Hansa and Folksam.
18  See footnote 8 above.
                                                6

27.      The combined market share of the parties in the small customers segment19 of
         Transport liability is estimated at [20-30 %]. The total value of the small customer
         segment in Sweden is approximately € 11.5 million (year 2000). This customer
         segment according to If P&C represents approximately [10-20 %] of the parties’
         total business volume in Transport liability. Consequently, the increment arising
         from the proposed operation will be very small. In addition, there are several other
         important competitors active in the Swedish market such as Trygg Hansa and
         Folksam. Market entry barriers are according to the parties, rather low. The market
         investigation did not reveal any competition concerns in this market segment.
(ii)     Finland
28.      In Finland the combined market share of Sampo and If P&C in the market for Fire
         and other Damage to Property insurance is [25-35 %], in the market for General
         Liability insurance [30-40 %] and in the total market of non-life insurance
         [30-40 %]. If P&C did not initiate operations in Motor vehicle liability and Land
         vehicle insurance until 2001 through the recently acquired Swedish company
         Volvia. The market shares of Volvia in both Motor vehicle liability and Land
         vehicle insurance markets have been under [5 %] in past two financial years.
29.      Sampo has a strong position in the Finnish non-life insurance market. However, the
         present transaction does not significantly reinforce its position since If P&C has only
         minor activities in Finland and therefore the increase in market share as a result of
         the operation is minor (less than [5 %] irrespective of segmentation). In all of the
         insurance segments mentioned above, there are also a number of other important
         market players with market shares between 10% and 26%, such as Pohjola and
         Tapiola. In addition, Nordea recently entered the Finnish market by making the
         insurance products of Trygg-Baltica, the Danish insurance company in the Nordea
         Group, available for Finnish customers.
30.      The Commission has examined the shares of the notifying party by taking each
         affected non-life product separately notwithstanding the possibility that the product
         markets may in fact be broader. The investigation concluded that the concentration
         would not raise serious doubts with regard to the creation or strengthening of a
         dominant position of Sampo/If P&C in Sweden or Finland.
(iii)    Impact on EEA and/or global markets
31.      The parties’ market share on the MAT market on an EEA-wide or global market
         would be less than 10% […]. As regards the sub-segment of marine insurance the
         parties’ combined position would according to the information received by the
         Commission not exceed 15% […].20 In addition, there are number of international
19       The large customer segment will be discussed below.
20   As regards aviation insurance (large risks) the parties do not have overlapping activities.
                                                         7

        players active in the global MAT insurance market, such as for example Allianz AG,
        AXA/UAP or Zürich.
32.     As regards Transport liability for large clients the total value of the EEA market in
        2000 amounted to € 6 000 million. This is the business If P&C is focussing on:
        approximately [75-85 %] of its overall sales in Transport liability in 2000 came from
        large clients. The sales of If P&C in 2000 amounted to € [10-20] million
        representing
        [less than 5 %] of the EEA market, while Sampo’s sales in 2000 generated from the
        same market segment amounted to [less than 5 %]. The largest competitors in the
        customer group of large international companies are TT-Club, Allianz, Gerling,
        Zurich and the AXA group. The market is very fragmented: the parties estimate
        market leader’s share AXA to be around 5%. At a global level, the parties’
        combined market position will be even less important.
33.     In view of the above considerations, the proposed operation will not raise serious
        doubts with regard to the creation or strengthening of a dominant position on any
        non-life insurance market irrespective of the market definitions chosen.
Article 2(4) aspects : co-ordination of competitive behaviour
34.     Although Sampo, Skandia and Storebrand are active in banking services they
        operate in different geographic areas (Sampo mainly operates in Finland, Storebrand
        in Norway, Skandia in Sweden).21 Consequently, the operation does not create any
        overlap with regard to most relevant markets, which can be regarded as national in
        scope (see also above). For those markets, which can be considered to have a wider
        geographic scope (e.g. certain corporate banking services and money market
        operations) the combined position of the parties on an EEA and global level is
        insignificant and does not raise any competition concerns. With respect to life
        insurance services, which are offered and sold at a national level (see above), the
        parties do not have any geographically overlapping activities in the EEA.22
35.     As a result of the concentration Sampo and Varma Sampo will join Storebrand and
        Skandia as controlling shareholders in the joint venture If P&C. Sampo, Storebrand
        and Skandia are each active in banking and life insurance markets which can be
        considered neighbouring and closely related markets to the non-life insurance
        markets where If P&C is active. In the Nordic countries Sampo is engaged in these
        activities only in Finland, Storebrand almost exclusively in Norway and Skandia is
21      Varma Sampo is not active in universal banking but provides a limited amount of loans exclusively
        to its employment insurance customer companies in Finland Varma Sampo invests the premium
        payment funds collected by its customers. In re-lending the customer company lends back a part of
        the paid premiums from the employment insurance company. Since Varma Sampo does not have any
        customers outside its employment insurance customers it can thus be assumed that it is not active on
        the open market for corporate loans.
22  Within the EEA Sampo exclusively operates in Finland, whereas Storebrand’s activities are confined to
    Norway and Sweden.
                                                    8

        active in banking in Sweden and Norway and in life insurance business in Finland,
        Norway and Sweden.
36.     With regard to banking business, Storebrand and Skandia are both currently active in
        the banking market in Norway. However, since Sampo is active in banking only in
        Finland, the concentration will not change the previous situation23. In consequence,
        the only neighbouring product and geographical market where Sampo and Skandia
        are both active is the Finnish life insurance market.
37.     In life insurance, Sampo and Skandia have overlapping activities of any appreciable
        extent only in Finland. The combined market share of Sampo and Skandia on the
        overall Finish life-insurance market is [20-30 %]. The combination of Sampo’s and
        Skandia’a activities would not lead to any substantial change in Sampo’s current
        position as the second largest life insurance provider on the Finnish life insurance
        market. Merita will clearly remain a market leader with a [40-50 %] market share.
        Moreover, there are other strong competitors in this market, such as Aurum with a
        [10-20 %] market share and Suomi-yhtiöt with a [10-20 %] share. In view of the
        market shares of the parent companies and the conditions of existing competition in
        the Finnish life insurance market, it appears that the parent companies do not have
        sufficient market power to eliminate competition in respect of a substantial part of
        the Finnish life-insurance market. Therefore, there appears to be no likelihood of co-
        ordination of competitive behaviour of the parties in the market concerned.
38.     For the above reasons, irrespective of the market definitions chosen, the
        Commission’s investigation has given no indication that the current transaction will
        have as its object or effect the co-ordination of the competitive behaviour of Sampo,
        Storebrand and Skandia on any of the markets where they both are active or on any
        closely related markets.
VII. CONCLUSION
39.     For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
        operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
        functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
        Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                              For the Commission
23  See further Case IV/JV.21 – Skandia / Storebrand / Pohjola.
                                                     9
