                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 05/09/2002
                                                                 SG (2002) D/231498-231499
                                                                         PUBLIC VERSION
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article                      MERGER PROCEDURE
17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89                       ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
                                                                 To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.2816 – Ernst & Young/Andersen France
               Notification of 1/7/2002 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
               No 4064/89
1. On 1 July 2002, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
     pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/891 by which the
     undertaking Ernst & Young (“Ernst & Young”), via its French entities Ernst & Young
     Audit SA and HSD Ernst & Young (SELAFA) (collectively “Ernst & Young France”),
     enter into a full merger within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the Council Regulation
     with parts of the French entities of the Andersen network comprising Barbier Frinault et
     Associés S.A., Barbier Frinault & Autres SAS, Barbier Frinault & Cie SAS, PGA SARL,
     Arthur Andersen International (SELAFA), SG Archibald, Archibald (SELAFA) and JDP
     (SELAFA) (collectively “Andersen France”). The notification was declared incomplete
     on 24 July 2002 and, on 5 August 2002, the Parties completed the information required
     by the Form CO.
1        OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended
         by Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p.
         17).
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

2. After examining the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
   operation falls within the scope of the Council Regulation No 4064/89 and that it does
   not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
   EEA agreement.
I.   THE PARTIES
3. Ernst & Young France is a member of the global Ernst & Young network of
   accounting and professional services firms, which employs over 83,000 people in 125
   countries. Andersen France was active as member firm of the Andersen Worldwide
   international network of accounting and professional services firms (“Andersen
   Worldwide”). Until recently the Andersen Worldwide member firms collectively
   employed approximately 85,000 people. Ernst & Young France as well as Andersen
   France are therefore the French branches of two of the so-called Big Five worldwide
   active accounting and professional services organisations. Apart from Andersen
   Worldwide and Ernst & Young, the other Big Five firms are PricewaterhouseCoopers
   (“PWC”), Deloitte & Touche Tohmatsu (“DTT”), and KPMG. In this decision, Ernst
   & Young, DTT, PWC and KPMG will be called the Big Four.
4. Ernst & Young France and Andersen France are both active in the fields of the
   following professional services: audit and accounting services; tax advisory services;
   reorganisation services; and legal services through integrated law firms. Ernst &
   Young is no longer active in the field of business consultancy and the business
   consulting business carried out by Andersen France does not form part of the
   transaction.
II. THE OPERATION
5. On 17 April 2002 Ernst & Young France and Andersen France entered into two
   principal agreements (the “Principal Agreement”) concerning (1) the audit and
   accounting business and (2) the legal and tax advisory business of both undertakings.
   Furthermore, five letter agreements have been concluded among the Parties providing
   for temporary measures.
6. The letter agreements cover the following measures: […]
7. The two Principal Agreements, one each concerning the audit and the legal part of
   Andersen France follow a similar structure and involve two separate stages: a first
   stage of “co-operation” between Ernst & Young France and Andersen France and a
   second stage in which Ernst & Young France and Andersen France will technically
   merge their activities.
8. For the co-operation stage, the Principal Agreements, in addition to the measures
   covered by the letter agreements, foresee […]. The legal structure of the two groups
   will remain distinct during the co-operation stage.
9. The second stage will be a technical merger between the French entities upon Ernst &
   Young France’s request, which must occur by […] at the latest. The Principal
   Agreements already foresee the essential terms and conditions of the merger.
                                                2

III.     CONCENTRATION
10. The operation leads to an amalgamation of Ernst & Young, which forms worldwide
     one single economic entity, with Andersen France, which after the implosion of
     Andersen Worldwide’s network forms an economic entity independent from all other
     Andersen Worldwide entities.
      Ernst & Young constitutes one single economic entity for the purpose of the
      application of the Merger Regulation
11. First, it has to be decided whether Ernst & Young’s international network constitutes a
     single economic entity for the purposes of the Merger Regulation and is, therefore, to
     be considered as an undertaking for the purposes of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger
     Regulation. For this purpose, it is necessary to examine whether the firms belonging to
     the Ernst & Young network share the same, permanent economic management and
     financial interests conferring to the network the character of a single economic entity
     for the purposes of the Merger Regulation.
12. The assessment of whether or not Ernst & Young is to be regarded as a single
     economic entity has to be made in the special and specific context of the audit and
     accounting market where there is an inherent economic incentive for member firms of
     the networks to act as a single economic entity. The key element for the economic
     success of a Big Five firm is the holding up of an international network, operating
     under a common brand name, and observing common professional rules and service
     standards which are centrally imposed on the member firms and centrally controlled.
     Furthermore, as discussed in a previous decision,2 each of the networks is de facto
     considered as one single economic entity showing a single behaviour on the market.
     Compared to franchise networks in which member firms active in different geographic
     markets hardly depend on each other, the Big Five member firms vitally depend on the
     centrally organised network the possibility of working together with their international
     partner firms and, also, on the reputation of each individual member firm of the
     network
13. In addition, even where no central distribution of revenues takes place between the
     individual member firms, strong common financial interest is established by the
     systematic referral of clients across the network. As the disintegration of the Andersen
     Worldwide network shows, the failure of one member firm of the network to comply
     with professional standards puts all other member firms at risk. This leads to the result
     that risks created by one member firm are shared among the network. This risk sharing
     is underlined by the existence of one single captive insurer for the business risks for all
     entities of the entire network.
14. These features are all present for the Ernst & Young network, whose member firms are
     linked to Ernst & Young Global –the central Ernst & Young entity - through a series
     of contractual relationships. […]
15. Members of the Ernst & Young network are moreover obliged […]
2    Case IV/M.1016 – Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand, paragraph 118, OJ - L 050, 26/02/1999 p.27
                                                    3

16. The described relationship with Ernst & Young Global applies to Ernst & Young
    France […]. The remaining Ernst & Young member firms are integrated into the
    network via Ernst & Young International, the older and less integrated central
    governance entity of the Ernst & Young network. […]
17. Ernst & Young, irrespective whether assessed according to the Ernst & Young
    International or the Ernst & Young Global structure, can be considered to be a single
    economic entity. In the Ernst & Young Global structure, a clear permanent economic
    centralised management is established, supplemented by centrally formulated policies
    and centrally provided services. In the case of the Ernst & Young International
    structure, the member firms rely on the common brand name and its reputation, the
    worldwide network and the centrally developed and monitored professional standards
    and common client relationships. The strong economic links by sharing of risks
    [regarding insurance and reputation] and [by sharing of] revenues on the basis of
    referrals also apply to the Ernst & Young International structure. These links are
    reinforced by the central co-ordination and facilitation of standards, strategies and
    initiatives and the provision of common services. As set out in previous cases for DTT
    and Ernst & Young3, these elements indicate a decisive degree of common economic
    management and common financial interest. They lead to the conclusion that Ernst &
    Young is to be considered as a single economic entity for the purposes of the Merger
    Regulation, irrespective in which structure this is assessed, and that Ernst & Young as
    a whole is one of the parties to the present transaction.
     Andersen France does not form part of the Andersen Worldwide network for the
     purpose of the application of the Merger Regulation
18. Second, it has to be decided whether Andersen France (or only parts of it) forms the
    relevant economic undertaking for the purposes of the Merger Regulation or whether
    Andersen Worldwide still exists as a single economic entity. The latter conclusion
    would lead to the result that, in accordance with Article 5(2) of the Merger Regulation,
    all transactions between Andersen Worldwide and Ernst & Young would have to be
    considered as one and the same concentration.
19. The Commission’s investigation has shown that Andersen Worldwide is no longer
    able to discharge its core contractual obligations of co-ordinating the global
    development of the member firms’ practices worldwide, their commercial strategies
    and their management, as laid down in the contractual relationship between Andersen
    Worldwide and the national Andersen firms. This is notably demonstrated by the fact
    that the former member firms of the global Andersen network, each individually and
    without awaiting Andersen Worldwide's consent, have already joined or seek to join
    different networks of the remaining Big Four firms on a country-by-country basis. As
    a result of this disintegration, no central decision making process is any longer in place
    and the member firms do no longer operate under a common brand name and comply
    with common professional and service standards. For these reasons, Andersen
    Worldwide is no longer considered to constitute a single economic entity for the
    purposes of the Merger Regulation.
3    Case COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu/Andersen UK; case COMP/M.2824 Ernst & Young
     / Andersen Germany
                                                   4

20. Furthermore, following the crisis, Andersen France terminated its membership in the
    Andersen network, effective as of 16 April 2002. In any case, Andersen France
    considers that it is no longer bound by the terms of the contractual relationship with
    Andersen Worldwide as a result of a fundamental change of circumstances.
21. Andersen France, in contrast, constitutes a single economic entity and is therefore to
    be considered as an undertaking for the purposes of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger
    Regulation. Andersen France consists of the French entities of the former Andersen
    network and is, due to French regulatory requirements, divided into two distinct
    business units: (1) audit; and (2) tax and legal, acting together as part of a
    multidisciplinary organisation. […] Given these elements, the business units of
    Andersen France share the same, economic management and financial interests
    conferring to them the character or a single economic entity, in the same way as
    already set out above for the international Ernst & Young network.
22. Given the above, Andersen France is to be regarded as the relevant economic
    undertaking for the purposes of the Merger Regulation.
      Already the co-operation stage is to be considered as concentration
23. Already the co-operation stage, as first stage foreseen in the Principal Agreements
    followed by a technical merger, is to be considered as a concentration for the purpose
    of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger Regulation. Already during this stage Ernst & Young
    and Andersen France share the same, permanent economic management and financial
    interests conferring to them the character of a single economic entity. The co-operation
    stage will therefore lead to a de facto amalgamation of Ernst & Young France and
    Andersen France.
24. In the same way as set out above for the Ernst & Young network in paragraph 12, the
    assessment of whether or not a concentration between Ernst & Young and Andersen
    France already occurs in the co-operation stage has to take into account the special and
    specific context of the audit and accounting market.[…]
25. These legal and economic links created between Ernst & Young and Andersen France
    will lead to a de facto amalgamation already during the co-operation period. They are
    therefore sufficient to consider Ernst & Young and Andersen France as a single
    economic unit under a single economic management in the co-operation period and the
    transaction constitutes a merger within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger
    Regulation4.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
26. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover of more
    than EUR 5 billion5 (Ernst & Young EUR […], Andersen France (excluding its
    consulting business) EUR […]) in 2001. Each of Ernst & Young and Andersen France
4   see Commission Notice on the concept of concentration under the Merger Regulation, paragraph 7.
5   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Notice on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include
    turnover for the period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates
    and translated into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                          5

    have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (Ernst & Young EUR
    […], Andersen France (excluding its consulting business) EUR […]), but they do not
    achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one
    and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community
    dimension.
V.      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
A. RELEVANT PRODUCT MARKETS
27. Both Ernst & Young and Andersen, before the disintegration of its network, were
    considered as two of the “Big Five” global audit and accounting networks. Both
    parties are active in the provision of a broad range of professional services to clients,
    which consist to a large extend of large companies, of both a national and
    multinational dimension, spanning a broad spectrum of business sectors, as well as to
    clients in the public sector. In a previous decision6, the Commission has found that the
    activities of the Big Five firms can be divided into the following relevant product
    markets:
        i)       Audit and accounting services to quoted and large companies;
        ii)      Audit and accounting services to small and medium-sized companies;
        iii)     Tax advisory and compliance services;
        iv)      Corporate finance advisory services.
28. Management consultancy services, which were also discussed in IV/M.1016 - Price
    Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand, are not considered in the present decision, as Ernst &
    Young is not active in management consultancy services and as Andersen France’s
    activity in this field is excluded from the transaction. In addition, the present
    transaction includes the provision of v) legal advisory services.
i) Audit and accounting services to quoted and large companies
29. Audit and accounting services consist of the performance of statutory and other audits
    of companies’ accounts (“commissariat aux comptes”) and other “audit-related”
    accounting services. In this context, audit-related accounting services include such
    services as general accounting services, systems assurance, business risks assessment,
    internal audit, transaction services, in particular due diligence services and preparation
    of reports for stock exchange listings, treasury, and advice in international accounting
    standards7. The Parties have agreed to such an approach and the market investigation
    confirmed the categorisation of such audit-related services in the French market.
30. As regards the definition of a separate market for audit and accounting services to
    quoted and large companies the Commission’s market investigation focussed
      – on the particularities for the French market in relation to the French regulatory
         framework for audit and audit related accounting services;
      – on the question whether statutory audit and audit related services belong to a
         single market when taking into account the impact of French particularities; and
6   IV/M.1016 - Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand quoted above, paragraphs 20,22
7   IV/M.1016 - Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand; COMP/M.2810 - Deloitte & Touche/Andersen UK
                                                    6

      – on the question whether audit and accounting services to quoted and large
          companies, which are predominantly provided by the Big Five global audit and
          accounting networks, form a distinct product market for the purpose of this
          decision.
The regulatory framework for audit and accounting services to French companies
31. The French regulations on statutory audit specifically provide for conflict of interest
    rules. The French Commercial Code clearly specifies that statutory auditors (and any
    of their partner firms of the same network) are prohibited from exercising certain
    activities that are deemed to be incompatible with their status. In addition to these
    legal requirements, the French Accounting Board8, has published ethical rules
    specifying, among other things, independence requirements, as well as precisely listing
    the activities that may be permitted to the statutory auditor and those that are definitely
    to be avoided. Besides French regulations, audit services to French companies could
    also be influenced by a new US regulation, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, which
    was approved by the US Congress and signed into law by President Bush on 30 July
    2002. This regulation prohibits registered public accounting firms from providing nine
    types of non-audit related services to clients9. According to the Parties, accounting
    firms providing audit services to French companies listed in the US financial markets
    are subject to the Act, and it is believed to trigger similar legislation in other countries.
32. Apart from these general features the French legislation on statutory audit services
    foresees the following two major particularities. First, according to the French
    Commercial Code companies, which are required to prepare consolidated accounts,
    must appoint at least two statutory auditors. The two auditors shall not belong to the
    same company nor even to a common network. In addition, the French stock exchange
    supervisory body Commission des Opérations de Bourse (“COB”), , considers that the
    two statutory auditors must have an equally significant role. Moreover, the French
    Commercial Code provides that the statutory auditor is appointed for a (renewable)
    period of six financial years. Within this period, the statutory auditor can only be
    removed under very specific circumstances10.
Statutory audit and audit-related services belong to the same product market
33. Because of the existing French restrictions and the newly created restrictions for
    French companies listed on the US financial markets, the Commission had to verify
    whether the range of services relating to audit and accounting constitute a single
    product market, or if statutory audit should be separated.
34. In this respect the market investigation confirmed that the prohibition to provide some
    audit related services to their statutory audit clients does not prevent the same firm
8   la Compagnie Nationale des Commissaires aux Comptes’, CNCC
9   (i) bookkeeping services relating to accounting records or financial statements of the client; (ii) financial
    information systems design and implementation; (iii) appraisal or valuation of services and fairness
    opinions; (iv) actuarial services; (v) internal audit outsourcing services; (vi) management functions or
    human resources; (vii) broker-dealer, investment adviser or investment banking services; (viii) legal or
    expert services unrelated to the audit; and (ix) any other service that the SEC Board determines to be
    impermissible.
10  The functions of the statutory auditor can only be terminated as a result of his resignation, the non-
    renewal of his function, the objection with good reasons requested by either one or several shareholders
    representing at least 5% of the share capital, the Public Prosecutor or the COB (for listed companies).
                                                           7

    from offering these services to other clients as similar expertise is needed for the
    provision of statutory audit and audit related services. Both kinds of services are
    therefore characterised by a clear supply-side substitutability. In addition, a large
    number of these services can still be provided together, also by the incumbent
    statutory auditor. Given these elements, statutory audit and audit related services are
    currently still to be considered as belonging to the same product market.
Audit and audit related services to quoted and large companies form a distinct product
market
35. In previous decisions11, the Commission identified the following main reasons for
    which it considered that audit and accounting services to quoted and large companies
    form part of a separate product market: the necessity for such companies to have audit
    and accounting services provided by a firm with the necessary reputation in the
    financial markets (in the case of quoted companies), the geographic breath to cover the
    companies’ needs worldwide (in the case of multinationals), the depth of expertise in
    the particular sector (large companies in general and, in particular, regulated sectors
    such as banking and insurance) and significant resources (all large companies). The
    Commission concluded that only the worldwide active audit and accounting firms
    known at that time as the Big Six had both the geographic coverage and the degree of
    reliability with respect to financial statements required by the international capital
    markets, so that only they operated in the audit and accounting market for quoted and
    large international companies.
36. The Parties recognise that for the purpose of this decision there is a market for audit
    services to large companies that is distinct from the market for the provision of audit
    and accounting services to small and medium-sized companies. However, they also
    pointed out that large French companies were also purchasing a significant amount of
    audit and audit-related services from firms that were not Big Five firms. The Parties
    explained that this was, in particular, related to the French co-auditors system (CO-
    Commissariat Au Compte system – “COCACs”), according to which large companies
    and state-owned companies usually request two types of audit services:
      – audit services for which Big Five firms are the exclusive providers because they
         require (i) a professional organisation with an international network, (ii) sufficient
         credibility as required by the international capital market and (iii) the ability to
         deploy significant resources with appropriate profile, potentially with a wide
         geographic coverage (“Big Five audit services”), and
      – audit services which may be provided either by large national firms such as
         Mazars & Guérard or Salustro Reydel or by a Big Five firms (“Big Five and
         national firms audit services”).
      The Parties considered that these two types of services were not substitutable but that
      Non-Big Five firms, however, may have some competitive impact on the Big Five
      audit firms, within the framework of the COCAC system, or at the time when a client
      renews a mandate.
37. The market investigation underlined how the French particularities enable second tier
    firms and even smaller audit firms to get access to large and quoted clients. Especially
    French auditors such as Mazars & Guérard and Salustro Reydel, and other second tier
11  Cases COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte & Touche/Andersen UK; IV/M.1016 - Price Waterhouse/Coopers &
    Lybrand,
                                                  8

    audit firms such as Constantin, BDO or Grant Thornton International, are therefore
    able to provide statutory audit services to a number of large companies and large
    quoted companies in France. However, the market investigation showed that large
    companies and quoted companies mainly employ a Non-Big Five firm in addition to a
    Big Five firm and do not consider second tier audit firms as substitutes to their Big
    Five auditors. Consequently in almost all cases, Non-Big Five audit firms will actually
    work together with a Big Five firm, in the framework of the French COCAC system12.
38. In practice the market investigation has shown that if a Non-Big Five Auditor
    collaborates with a Big Five firm, the split would often be on a geographical basis. For
    instance, the Big Five firm will be in charge of the international aspects or cover
    countries where the second tier firm would not have any network. A division by
    subsidiaries or by business areas was also observed, but always against the background
    of the Non-Big Five auditor to have the capacity and the resources for successfully
    providing the services required. The following statement of one large company can be
    seen as representative for this observation. This company currently employs one Big
    Five and one Non-Big Five firm as its statutory auditor and stated “we think that we
    have a good tandem by having as first statutory auditor a well-known French firm,
    which has a decent international network and above all an intimate knowledge of [our
    company]. [Our Big Five auditor] brings a powerful network, a strong knowledge of
    the US techniques (US GAAP, SEC, etc…) and a name that is internationally
    recognised”.
39. This perception was confirmed by Andersen’s current large clients addressed in the
    Commission’s market investigation, who expressed unanimously the view that neither
    Andersen France on its own (without the former Andersen network), nor any of the
    second tier audit firms was equivalent to a Big Five firm. It was further confirmed by
    the replies of these companies to the question, whether they would change Andersen in
    favour of a Big Five firm, in case Andersen France would not be taken over by a Big
    Five firm. Those firms who, in addition to Andersen, had a Big Five firm as their
    second statutory auditor said they would not change to a Non-Big Five firm, while
    those who had, in addition to Andersen France, a Non-Big Five second statutory
    auditor said that they would have to replace Andersen France by one of the remaining
    Big Four firms.
40. Finally, the market investigation indicated that the vast majority of customers and
    competitors recognised a clear difference between the Big Five audit firms and their
    other competitors. According to customers, there are big differences between Big Five
    firms and the other auditors, in terms of their international network, their expertise
    about international accounting standards and their recognition from shareholders,
    banks and financial markets, especially outside France. Some Non-Big Five firms
    mentioned that a key difference between the Big Five and others resulted from their
    financial and commercial strength, which provides them with additional resources in
    terms of promotion and marketing, training, and research and which makes it possible
    for them to cope with the possible loss of a client.
12  The limited number of large companies and large quoted companies that only have Non-Big Five
    statutory auditors have mostly very limited activities outside France. They therefore do not need the
    specific elements that only Big Five audit firms are able to provide, in particular, a large international
    network, international reputation and expertise about international accounting standards.
                                                         9

Conclusion
41. In conclusion for the purpose of this decision it can be considered that the Big Five
     audit firms exclusively serve the audit and accounting market for large companies and
     large quoted companies. Non-Big Five firms can only exert some competitive pressure
     at the margin, within the scope of the COCAC system. Therefore a distinct market for
     audit and accounting services to quoted and large companies can be defined. This
     market definition is in line with the one suggested by the parties and seems to best
     reflect the particularities of the French market.
ii) Audit and accounting services to small and medium-sized companies
42. The market for audit and accounting services to small and medium-sized companies
     covers the audit and accounting services to all those companies, who do not require
     services that can only be provided by one of the global audit and accounting networks.
     This includes all audit and accounting services in France, for which the Big Five are
     not the exclusive providers, as set out in the above paragraphs 35-41. The parties
     accepted this definition and it was confirmed through the investigation that audit and
     accounting services to all other companies not requiring services, which can be only
     provided by the Big Five firms, constitute a separate relevant product market.
iii) Tax advisory and compliance services
43. The Parties consider that the provision of tax advisory services is not distinct from the
     larger market for legal advisory services. According to the Parties this can be
     documented by the fact that major reviews of the French legal market such as “La
     Profession Comptable” or “La radiographie 2001 des cabinets d’avocats d’affaires en
     France” do not make such a distinction when presenting their data on the French legal
     market. In line with previous decisions, the market investigation has however shown
     that the definition of a separate product market for tax advisory services is justified for
     the purpose of this decision. Although according to French legislation all qualified
     lawyers in France are allowed to provide tax advisory services, the provision of these
     services requires a strong specialisation and a constant up-date of know-how due to
     frequent and significant changes in tax legislation. Tax advisory services in France are
     predominantly provided by specialised tax experts (“conseillers juridiques”) and the
     level of supply-side substitutability with other legal advice is therefore very limited, as
     it is also observed in other EEA countries.
44. The market investigation showed some features, which could justify a definition of
     separate markets depending on whether such services were provided predominantly
     with regard to national tax legislation, or to international issues. Whereas national tax
     advice can be provided by a firm, which is only active in one country, the provision of
     international tax advice services can, in principle, be provided either by an
     international network or by co-operation of different national firms. However, it is not
     necessary for the purpose of this decision to define the market precisely, as the
     proposed operation does not lead to the creation or strengthening of a dominant
     position irrespective of the precise definition retained.
                                                   10

iv) Corporate Finance Advisory Services
45. As regards the market for the provision of corporate finance advisory, the market
    investigation has confirmed the results of the case IV/M.1016 – Price
    Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand that this area can be considered as a distinct product
    market.
v) Legal Services
46. The market investigation has shown that there is a separate market for legal advice . It
    also showed some features, which could justify a definition of separate markets for
    services provided predominantly with regard to national legislation, and services with
    international dimension. In the same way as regarding tax advice, the provision of
    international legal advice can, in principle, be provided either by an international
    network or by co-operation of different national firms. The market investigation
    indicated that for a number of customers the network solution is the preferred choice.
    However, it is not necessary for the purpose of this decision to define the market
    precisely, as the proposed operation does not lead to the creation or strengthening of a
    dominant position irrespective of the precise definition retained.
B. RELEVANT GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS
47. As regards the geographic dimension of the relevant product markets for i) audit and
    accounting services to quoted and large companies, ii) audit and accounting services to
    small and medium-sized companies, and iii) tax advisory and compliance services the
    Commission has stated in case IV/M.1016 – Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand
    that these markets are national in scope. The reasons given were in particular
    significant national differences for the services’ main features such as the specific
    professional expertise required, applicable regulations, and the relevant laws for which
    the above mentioned advisory services are provided. The market investigation has
    confirmed the national scope of these product markets, as these features of the market
    have not changed to date. The same applies for the provision of v) legal advisory
    services, which can also be considered to be of national dimension.
48. With regard to the geographic markets for iv) corporate finance advisory services, the
    Commission has already recognised the existence of both national and international
    aspects for the provision of these services. In the absence of competition concerns, the
    Commission did not have to conclude on the geographic scope of these markets. As
    the market investigation has not raised new elements in this respect, and as these two
    markets do not lead to the creation or the strengthening of a dominant position
    irrespective of the precise definition of the markets’ geographic scope, the
    Commission does not need to deviate from its previous approach for the purpose of the
    present case.
49. If a separate market for tax advisory services with international dimension were to be
    considered, the market investigation has indicated that such a market would show
    some national characteristics. Tax advice on international matters is linked to the
    national tax law of the advice seeking company and therefore presupposes knowledge
    of the national tax regime under which the company is operating. The company will
    therefore normally liase on matters with an international character with its national tax
    adviser, who will then usually co-operate with experts - either from the network or
    from independent co-operating firms - in the jurisdiction where the other end of the
    operation in question is located. The precise definition of the geographic scope of such
                                                 11

    a possible market, however, can be left open, as the proposed operation does not create
    or strengthen a dominant position irrespective of the geographic delineation of the
    market chosen. The same line of reasoning applies to a possible market for legal
    advice with international dimension. Also for this possible market the precise
    delineation of the market can be left open as the proposed operation does not create or
    strengthen a dominant position irrespective of the geographic definition of the market
    chosen.
C.  ASSESSMENT
50. The transaction will lead to horizontal overlaps in all the relevant markets mentioned
    above. The Parties’ combined market shares will, however, only exceed 15 % in the
    French audit and accounting services market for quoted and large companies and the
    French tax advisory services market with an international dimension, assuming that
    such a market exists. On all other relevant markets deterioration of competition can be
    excluded, as the parties combined market shares will be below 15% and the clients’
    choice of service providers in these areas is not limited to the Big Five audit and
    accounting firms.
51. On the audit and accounting services to small and medium-sized companies market,
    the Parties estimate their market shares to be below 15%13. In any case, there are many
    alternative suppliers so that no competition issue arises. For corporate finance advisory
    services, the Parties are in competition with the large investment banks; the parties
    regard their combined market shares as de minimis given their low turnover in
    comparison to the value of the transactions achieved. The combined market shares of
    the Parties for the overall tax advisory and compliance services market is also below
    15%14 and would be even lower for purely national tax advisory and compliance
    services, if such a market exists. Regarding the provision of legal services, be it on a
    national or international basis, the combined market shares of Ernst & Young and
    Andersen France would be less than 10% according to the Parties’ estimates. The
    market investigation has confirmed that customers would have no difficulty to find
    alternative suppliers, since the Parties compete with a large number of law firms
    providing legal advice, a significant number of which are integrated into international
    networks.
52. In view of these elements, it can be excluded that the operation could raise competition
    concerns in the markets for audit and accounting services to small and medium-sized
    companies, tax advisory and compliance services with no international dimension;
    corporate finance advisory services and legal services. The competition assessment of
    the transaction therefore focused on the markets for 1) audit and accounting services to
    quoted and large companies, and the possible market for 2) tax advisory and
    compliance services with an international dimension.
13 on the basis of some figures taken from La Profession Comptable, March 2002
14 on the basis of a 2002 study “Le guide des cabinets d’avocats d’affaires”, which presents the top 150
    business law firms with turnover data
                                                        12

1. Market for audit and accounting services for quoted and large companies
a) Market shares in the relevant market
53. During its investigation, the Commission was faced with some difficulties regarding
    the calculation of market shares for the relevant market for audit services for quoted
    and large companies. There is no public data available on the French market, except
    turnover figures for the largest multi-disciplinary audit networks published by the
    specialised review “La Profession Comptable” on the basis of a survey among these
    firms. But these statistics do not match the relevant markets defined above, which
    made it necessary to rely on proxies and on data provided by the Parties and their
    competitors regarding their turnover for the relevant market. The calculation of market
    shares for the relevant market has required in a first step the definition of the sample,
    which gives the best approximation for the French market for audit and accounting
    services for quoted and large companies. In a second step the best estimates of market
    shares for this sample has to be established.
54. In order to define a sample of companies that could correspond to quoted and large
    companies requiring Big Five audit services the Parties and the Commission worked
    on some common approach. The Parties proposed and the Commission agreed that
    companies comprising the SBF 120 (the 120 largest French groups listed on the Paris
    Stock Exchange) plus the 12 largest state-owned companies constituted a suitable
    proxy, among other things because they represent large companies, with a turnover of
    at least EUR 1,500 million in 2001. On that basis, two types of calculations were
    considered.
55. The first method was to calculate market shares on the basis of the number of statutory
    audit mandates. This method has the advantage to be based on public information,
    since the name of the statutory auditors of big companies is published in their annual
    report. However, it only gives a partial picture, since it covers statutory audit only and
    not other audit-related services, and since it does not take into account the differences
    linked to the various types of clients, in terms of scope of services, and of level of fees.
    To address these shortcomings, the Parties have also calculated market shares based on
    the turnover of Big Five statutory audit clients of the relevant sample and based on the
    market capitalisation of these clients. However, the clients’ turnover or market
    capitalisation are not necessarily proportionate to auditors’ fees15; hence a second
    additional calculation method was used.
56. The second method, developed by the Commission in complement to the first one, was
    to collect turnover figures from the Parties and from competitors for the relevant
    market. This method has the advantage that it includes the fees linked to all services
    provided to the identified sample of companies –not statutory audit only- and that it is
    based on the actual turnover of the audit firms achieved for the relevant sample. This
    method has however two disadvantages. First, the data provided by the parties are
    confidential, so that only ranges can be disclosed for the analysis below. Secondly, and
    as the parties have pointed out, it may not be sufficiently reliable, because of a lack of
    precise analytical accounting among the Big Five audit firms for the relevant sample
    defined and because of the Big Five firms having slightly different ways to classify the
15  The Parties, however, have argued that such turnover data, in particular, were not accurate to assess the
    market position of the Big Five firms on the affected French market for audit and accounting services to
    large companies.
                                                         13

    various audit-related services among their business units. The following table
    summarises the market shares resulting from these calculation methods.
                               Table 1: Calculation of market shares
 Big         Five Andersen          E&Y            Andersen      PwC         DTT        KPMG
 Market               France                       + E&Y
 Shares
 Method 1
 By mandates 22%                    21%            43%           25%         23%        9%
 (2002)
 By         client
 turnover
                      29%           15%            44%           22%         18%        16%
 (2000)
 By         client
 capitalisation
                      25%           16%            41%           29%         17%        13%
 (24 July 2002)
 Method 2
 By amount of 35-40%                15-20%         50-55%        15-20%      20-25%     5-10%
 fees (2001)
Sources: Parties’ best estimate based on published Annual Reports and publicly data available (method 1);
confidential data provided from parties and from competitors (method 2)
57. As can be seen from the table, the second method results in the parties having higher
    combined market shares than with the first method: more than 50% against less than
    45%. One explanation for this difference relates to the fact that Andersen France
    achieves a large turnover outside statutory audit. According to the Parties audit-related
    services represent more than 50% of Andersen France’s total fees from SBF 120 and
    large state-owned companies, against only 26% for Ernst & Young. Non statutory
    audit work is not reflected in the first calculation method, which only looks at statutory
    audit clients. Moreover, it is worth pointing out that the resulting market shares do not
    correspond with the position of the Big Five firms regarding the overall turnover
    achieved for audit services in France. The magazine La Profession Comptable in
    March 2002 has published a survey of the 49 largest audit firms in France, with a
    turnover of each at least EUR 7.6 million. If only the Big Five are considered, and
    taking out the book-keeping services, which large firms do not require anyway, the
    comparative size of the Big Five offers the following different picture of the market
    structure.
                  Table 2: Comparative turnovers of the Big Five audit firms
                 Andersen E&Y             Andersen PwC               DTT       KPMG      total
                                          + E&Y
Turnover
2001
                 232          166         398           323          184       220       1125
(MEUR )
Comparative
shares of the
                 21%          15%         35%           29%          16%       20%       100%
Big Five total
Source: La Profession Comptable, March 2002, p.24 column ‘Audit and conseil’
                                                           14

58. As it can be seen from Table 2 the merging Parties with regard to the overall audit
    turnover have a shorter lead over their competitors. The market investigation has
    shown that one possible reason for the discrepancy between the turnover figures
    presented in Table 1 and Table 2 was related to the amount of referred work, which
    means the audit work done in France that originates from audit contracts gained
    through the Big Five network in other countries. It appears that PwC and KPMG, in
    particular, make a high turnover from referred work in proportion of their total
    turnover in France. This is reflected in Table 2 but not in the market shares based on
    the enlarged SBF 120 sample in Table 1.
      b) General characteristics of the market
59. Before assessing the impact of the transaction on competition in the market for audit
    and accounting services for quoted and large companies, it is useful to outline the
    conditions of competition in this market. For quoted and large companies, the
    competition for audit and accounting services in France operates at the moment of
    competitive tenders, whereby companies invite several firms to submit a proposal.
    Between 1997 and 2002, the parties found that 24 tenders were launched for SBF 120
    and large state owned companies and that for 41 incumbent auditors under review, 25
    new auditors were appointed. As set out by a previous Commission decision16 and
    confirmed by the investigation, the length of time for which audit appointments are
    made tend to be long-term –not only because of the 6-year legal appointment- so that
    the auditor-client relationship can last many years. Even if an audit appointment is
    very often renewed in favour of the incumbent auditor, launching an invitation to
    tenders imposes a competitive constraint on the incumbent auditor, often leading to a
    re-negotiation of the fees. The market investigation has confirmed the existence of this
    competitive constraint.
60. Moreover, for a bidding market to be competitive, the main requirement is that there
    exist a sufficient number of credible bidders that are willing to compete. The
    Commission’s investigation showed that the respective market shares among the Big
    Five in this case did not fully reflect the ability to win a tender. The market
    investigation has shown that any of the Big Five could possibly win or lose a
    competitive tender. This is illustrated in the following table, which shows all the bids
    identified by the Parties and where newly appointed auditors are presented in bold. As
    can be seen, each of the Big Five audit firms has an equal chance to be invited to
    tenders. Even though the incumbent auditors tend to be re-appointed, there are a
    number of changes, and each of the Big Five has won some bids against the others
    over the past years.
16   IV/M.1016 - Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand, quoted above, paragraphs 20,22
                                                   15

                      Table 3: Details of past competitive bids on the French market
Group                  Year                  Bidders17                        Incumbent Auditors     Appointed
                            AA DTT  EY    KPMG PwC MG         SR     Other                           Auditors18
Air France             2002                                                   DTT      Other         DTT
Arcelor                2002
                            [                                                 AA                     KPMG
                                                                                                              KPMG
Areva                  2002                                                   AA       MG            DTT     MG    SR
Bouygues Offshore      2002                                                   AA       SR            EY      SR
DCN Participation      2002                                                                          EY
EDF                    2002                                                   EY       MG            EY      DTT   MG
GDF                    2002                                                   EY       MG            EY      MG
SNCF                   2002                                                   EY       DTT           EY      MG
SNPE                   2002                                                   AA       Other         AA      MG
Eiffage                2001                                                   EY       SR            PwC     SR
GIAT Industries        2001                                                   EY       MG            EY      DTT
Publicis Groupe        2001                                                   MG       Other         EY      MG
BNP Paribas            2000                                                   AA       PwC     SR    AA      PwC   MG
De Dietrich            2000                                                   MG       SR            AA      MG
EADS                   2000                                                   EY       MG            AA
Nexans                 2000                                                   AA       MG            AA      EY
Société Générale(3)    2000                                                   AA       KPMG          AA      EY
Sommer Allibert        2000                                                   EY       KPMG          KPMG    PwC
BIC                    1999                                                   EY       PwC           DTT     Other
MMA                    1999                                                   KPMG     Other         EY      PwC
Peugeot                1999                                                   AA       PwC           PwC     Other
Carrefour France       1998                                                   AA       KPMG          AA      EY
La Poste               1997                                                                          PWC     MG
La Française des Jeux  1997                                               ..] Fiducial KPMG    Other AA      KPMG
  Source: best estimates of the Parties (annex K, form C.O.)
           c) Risk of single dominance
  61. As can be seen from Table 1, the merged entity would have a large market share of the
         French audit and accounting market for large and quoted companies, with a noticeable
         lead over its competitors. For that reason, the Commission had to investigate further
         whether the merger may lead to a situation of single dominance in the audit and
         accounting services market for large and quoted companies. But the following
         elements show that competition concerns can be excluded with regard to the risk of
         single dominance.
           The merged entity will loose a number of clients, which will inevitably reduce its
           market shares
  62. As a starting point, it is important to notice that the market shares calculated above
         will be inevitably reduced after the merger. First of all, Andersen France has already
         lost several clients as a result of the Enron affair. The negative impact of the Enron
         case on the Andersen network’s reputation has already resulted in clients defections
         that amount to around EUR […]million, which should be deducted from the turnover
         calculations in Table 1. Furthermore, the concentration will automatically lead to a
         loss of clients, no later than end of 2002, due to conflicts of interest between Andersen
  17     where AA= Andersen; EY= Ernst & Young; MG= Mazars & Guérard (French second-tier auditor) and
         SR= Salustro Reydel (French second-tier auditor)
  18     Most companies have the minimum two auditors required by the French COCAC system. However,
         some companies have opted to appoint more than two auditors. SBF 120 companies Arcelor and EADS
         are not incorporated under French law and do therefore not fall under the COCAC system.
                                                            16

     France and Ernst & Young. These losses are inevitable because, on the one hand, the
     Parties can no longer be the two statutory auditors for one company under the
     COCAC system19 and because, on the other hand, the merger, for a number of other
     companies of the sample, will lead to incompatibility and independence issues
     between audit and audit-related services provided by each party for the same
     company. The Parties have estimated this inevitable reduction of turnover to be EUR
     […]million. When deducting these inevitable losses of clients in the turnover of the
     Parties, and allocating the losses among the competitors according to their overall
     market shares in the total market for audit, the Commission, using the second method
     of calculation based on turnover in Table 1, estimates that the Parties’ combined
     market share would be reduced to 40-45% market shares in terms of turnover, against
     20-25% for PwC, 25-30% for DTT and 5-10% for KPMG.
63. Besides, Andersen France will automatically lose referred work, from the
    reassignment of referred work from ex-Andersen offices, which have joined on a
    national level some of the other Big Five networks. Even though these losses do not
    equate to a reduction of market shares, they are estimated by the parties as […] of
    Andersen France’s audit turnover to large companies, which will diminish their
    resources and their list of references and therefore potentially weaken their
    competitive abilities and to the same extent strengthen the other Big Five firms.
64. In addition, the Parties point out that some of Andersen France’s existing contracts
    with large and quoted firms are under threat, as some clients are considered to be
    unwilling retain the former Andersen partners for their audit and accounting work even
    after the new entity has been created. This perception was also confirmed by some of
    the Parties’ competitors during the Commission’s market investigation, who expressed
    the view that they may be able to gain additional clients after the merger.
      A bidding market with remaining competitive bidders
65. As was already explained in previous decisions20, the audit market is a bidding market.
    The Commission tried therefore to clarify whether the other market participants will
    have the incentives and ability to gain some of the customers that the merged entity
    will retain, by competing against the merged entity. The Parties provided some
    elements that show that DTT, KPMG and PwC all meet the level required by clients in
    order to be considered as credible bidders. For large companies and for quoted
    companies these firms are considered to have the resources (the Parties estimate that
    each firm has more than 2000 employees in France), the international credentials and
    the strong global networks required to be capable to provide audit services for large
    and quoted companies. This perception is confirmed by the significant amount of audit
    work referred into France by other members of the international network, which
    emphasises their global credentials as effective and trusted auditors, and thus
    reinforces their ability to successfully participate in tenders. It appeared from the
    market investigation that PwC and KPMG, in particular, achieved high turnovers from
    referred-in work. Finally, as can be seen from Table 3, each of the Big Five has been
    systematically invited to tenders for new mandates and has been able to win bids over
    other Big Five firms in the past years.
19  e.g. for Société Générale, which is currently audited by Ernst & Young and Andersen France
20  COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte & Touche/Andersen UK; COMP/M.2824 – Ernst&Young Germany /
    Andersen France; IV/M.1016 – Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand
                                                          17

66. This perception is also true for KPMG France, which appears as the firm among the
    Big Five, which has the least number of statutory audit mandates among SBF 120
    firms and large state-owned companies. In this respect the Commission investigated
    whether this lower number of statutory mandates among SBF 120 companies for
    KPMG constituted a competitive disadvantage in its ability to bid successfully for new
    audit mandates against other Big Five firms. The investigation, however, showed that
    KPMG was considered a viable bidder by customers, as for instance illustrated from
    the fact that it is systematically invited to bid for tenders (see Table 3). The
    Commission was provided with examples of bids that KPMG had submitted recently
    to large French companies, which revealed the following main elements First, KPMG
    can show that it is a credible bidder on the French market through a number of
    references of large French clients (e.g. TotalFinaElf, Carrefour, EADS and AGF),
    through its presence in the French professional authorities, and through its overall size
    (second largest auditor in France). Second, KPMG benefits from the resources and
    expertise of its international networkand can show it has clients in portfolio, which are
    large firms in the same sector but with headquarters in different countries. Finally, the
    Commission was provided with evidence showing that KPMG could possibly use its
    international resources, and especially global partners, methods and sector expertise in
    addition to its French resources.
67. All these elements show that the merger will not result in single dominance of the
    merged entity. Even though Ernst & Young combined with Andersen France may have
    more mandates in the first place, the gap, in particular after the expected losses, will
    not be large enough to prevent the other remaining Big Four firms from being credible
    bidders.
    Competition between appointed COCACs
68. Finally, the position of the second tier auditors, and their ability to exert some
    competitive pressure at the margins, is another element against the possibility of a
    dominant position to be held by the merged entity. Admittedly, the inevitable
    reduction from five to four players, in addition to issues of conflicts of interest, will
    reduce the choice of the large customers. Consequently, it is not clear whether any
    buyer power could be exerted in the market after the operation, especially in what
    regards statutory audit mandates.
69. But it appeared from the investigation that the COCAC system, and the presence of
    two statutory auditors, might provide clients with the means to react to anti-
    competitive behaviour from the merged entity. Non-statutory audit work represents a
    large part of the fees earned by the auditors, in addition to their statutory work. Clients
    could threat to switch part of this work to the second auditor, if the merged entity
    would try to abuse its position. This is all the more the case as second tier auditors are
    very often present within the COCAC system, so that they audit large and quoted firms
    in co-operation with one Big Five firm. It was also noticed that Mazars & Guérard and
    Salustro-Reydel are sometimes invited to the same tenders as the Big Five firms.
    Customers could therefore threaten to give more work to second tier auditors. Finally,
    clients could also threaten to give non-statutory audit work to a competitor. In
    conclusion, it seems that there may remain alternatives for clients, especially from
    competition between the two COCACs during their mandates, in the case they would
    be confronted with any attempted rise of fees or other unilateral behaviour from the
    merged entity.
                                                  18

    Conclusion for the risk of single dominance
70. It appears therefore that the relatively high market shares calculated above do no
    reflect the actual market power of the merged entity, which will still be faced with
    competitors that are credible bidders and with customers that may be able to use
    alternative suppliers. Consequently, it can be concluded that the proposed
    concentration does not raise single dominance issues.
      d) Risk of collective dominance
71. In case IV/M.1016 – Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand, the Commission
    considered that the market characteristics of the audit and accounting market for
    quoted and large companies could, in principle, lead to collective dominance. On the
    demand side, the Commission considered, in particular, that there was moderate
    growth in the market and a low price elasticity of demand. On the supply side, the
    Commission considered the existence of a high concentration, high market
    transparency for a rather homogeneous product, mature production technology and
    structural links between competitors. Finally the Commission considered that high
    barriers to entry characterise this market, in particular, due to the audit firm’s required
    broad geographical network, extensive human resources required, and a well
    established reputation which has been built up over a significant period of time.
72. However, the Commission found no conclusive proof that such dominance resulted
    from the relevant operation in the (then) Big Six market. The Commission concluded
    that ‘in view of the continued post-merger existence of no fewer than five suppliers, of
    the likely continued participation of these five suppliers in the tender offers which
    constitute the competitive process in the relevant markets, and of the non-emergence
    of any two clear leading firms following the merger; the Commission has found no
    conclusive proof that the merger would create or strengthen a position of oligopolistic
    or duopolistic dominance within any of the national Big Six markets for audit and
    accounting services to large companies within the Community.’21
73. The Commission in previous decisions22 and the Court of First Instance23 have
    identified three conditions which are necessary for a finding of collective dominance:
      – each member of the oligopoly must have the ability to know how the other
         members are behaving (transparency)
      – the tacit co-ordination must be sustainable over time; there must be an incentive
         not to depart from the common policy on the market;
      – actual and potential competitors and clients have no possibility to jeopardise the
         oligopolistic behaviour.
74. In the context of the present proposed concentration, it could be considered whether
    the current market characteristics in combination with the further reduction of market
    players from five to four players could lead to sufficient market transparency, to
    effective retaliation mechanisms and to a lack of threatening response from actual and
21  Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand, quoted above, paragraph 119
22  Case IV/M.1741 MCI Worldcom/Sprint paragraph 259
23  Case T-342/99 of 6 June 2002 Airtours v Commission, paragraph 62
                                                     19

    potential competitors and clients, these elements resulting in the creation of collective
    dominance in the audit and accounting market for quoted and large companies. The
    market investigation has shown that the markets characteristics described in paragraph
    72-73 above have not changed in such a way as to exclude the possibility that a
    reduction from five to four market players could lead to the creation of collective
    dominance. In particular, the COCAC system, and the intimate links it creates between
    the auditors across a range of clients may increase transparency and facilitate co-
    ordination among market players.
75. However, in the context of this decision, it is not necessary to examine in greater detail
    whether or not the proposed transaction may lead to a situation of collective
    dominance, as there is no causal link between the proposed operation and the possible
    situation of collective dominance. As the Commission already found in the previous
    case COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu/Andersen UK, the reasons for
    excluding this causal link are the following:
      • the reduction from five to four global accounting networks was inevitable;
      • the proposed merger is not more harmful for competition than other possible
         scenarios as regards the risk for collective dominance on the market for audit and
         accounting services to large and quoted companies.
      Inevitable reduction from Big Five to Big Four
76. In assessing the competitive impact of the operation, the Commission had to take into
    account the peculiar situation of the global Andersen network, which has already
    beenoutlined in the Commission’s decision COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte Touche
    Tohmatsu/Andersen UK.
77. The rapid disintegration of Andersen’s world-wide network has made it impossiblefor
    another organisation to use the individual national Andersen entities to recreate a fifth
    force for the provision of audit and accounting services for large and quoted
    companies. Even if Andersen France could continue as an independent audit and
    accounting services firm, the market investigation has shown that Andersen France
    could no longer exist as a viable competitor in the market for audit and accounting
    services to quoted and large companies. The Commission’s investigation clearly
    indicated that Andersen France, on its own, was not a Big Five audit firm and that the
    loss of its network would result –without a merger with another Big Five- in Andersen
    France losing its large and quoted clients.
78. Moreover, the investigation showed that a take-over by one of the second tier firms,
    like Salustro-Reydel or Mazars & Guérard, would not result in a firm capable of
    substituting any of the remaining Big Four, because this would require that the whole,
    or at least the majority of the national Andersen entities were taken over by such a new
    entrant. It is excluded that the take-over of Andersen France by any of the second tier
    would give them the automatic status of a Big Five firm. And the take-over of the
    entire Andersen network by a new entrant is no longer possible, since, world-wide, the
    different former Andersen member firms, each individually, have already joined or are
    about to join the different remaining Big Four networks. Even though the investigation
    showed that in France, the gap between the Big Five and the second tier auditors may
    not be as large as for instance in the UK, and that the Enron affair may further bridge
    the gap, it also came clearly that there was still a big difference, which could not be
    resolved in the short-run from the take-over of just one national entity.
                                                  20

79. Therefore, Andersen France’s business of providing auditing and accounting services
     to large and quoted companies would inevitably accrue to the existing remaining Big
     Four.
        The proposed merger is not more harmful for competition than other possible
      scenarios with regard to the risk of collective dominance
80. As outlined in the Commission’s decision on Case COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte Touche
     Tohmatsu/Andersen UK, if the transaction proposed did not take place for any
     conceivable reasons (such as withdrawal of the notification or regulatory prohibition),
     only two possible alternative scenarios to the proposed transaction can be established.
     These two scenarios are:
       – the take-over of Andersen France by one of the other remaining Big Four audit
          and accounting firms;
       – no take-over takes place and the existing clients would be dispersed between the
          remaining Big Four firms (with two sub-scenarios for the attribution of shares).
81. The different scenarios, which could lead to a different repartition of market shares,
     are set out in Table 4 below. The ranges used in Table 4 make reference to the
     different approximations set out in Table 1. Scenario I refers to the hypothesis of an
     addition of market shares following a supposed concentration between one of the other
     three remaining Big Four firms. This scenario does not take into account of any
     possible post merger losses of Andersen France in the wake of the Enron affair. In
     Scenario II, relating to the hypothesis of dispersion of shares, two different alternatives
     have been considered. The first could be that Andersen France's market share is
     equally distributed to each of the remaining Big Four firms (“Equal share”). The
     second is a distribution on an equi-proportional basis, where Andersen France’s
     market share is transferred to the remaining Big Four in proportion to their respective
     current market shares (“Equi-proportional share”). Given the difficulties explained
     above regarding the calculation of market shares, the market shares used are those on
     the basis of the number of mandates, which are based on public data. But in addition,
     as a matter of completeness, the total possible range24 is presented in brackets.
24 to calculate the total range, addition of market shares were made line by line in Table 1, in order to be
     consistent with the methods used in the calculations
                                                          21

      Table 4. Hypothetical market shares for the different scenarios
                                                  E&Y              PWC           DTT      KPMG
   Market shares ex ante                          […]              […]           […]      […]
                                                  (15-21%)         (15-29%)      (17-25%) (5-16%)
   Proposed Merger between E&Y and                […]              […]           […]      […]
   Andersen France
                                                  (41-55%)         (15-29%)      (17-25%) (5-16%)
   Scenario I
   Takeover Andersen France by PWC                […]              […]           […]      […]
                                                  (15-21%)         (47-55%)      (17-25%) (5-16%)
   Takeover Andersen France by DTT                […]              […]           […]      […]
                                                  (15-21%)         (15-29%)      (42-60%) (5-16%)
   Takeover Andersen France by KPMG               […]              […]           […]      […]
                                                  (15-21%)         (15-29%)      (17-25%) (31-45%)
   Scenario II
   Dispersion : Equal share                       […]              […]           […]      […]
                                                  (21-27%)         (21-35%)      (23-31%) (11-22%)
   Dispersion: Equi-proportional share            […]              […]           […]      […]
                                                  (21-27%)         (22-36%)      (23-31%) (8-19%)
      Source: Calculation on the basis of market shares as calculated in Table 1
82. As indicated above, the reduction of market players from five to four appears to be
    inevitable. When examining all different possible situations described in scenarios I
    and II, the only relevant difference between them and the proposed operation for the
    competition analysis is the different repartition of market shares. However, as already
    stated above, market shares are of less importance in the audit and accounting services
    market for large and quoted companies, as almost all acquisition of new clients takes
    place via bidding procedures launched by the clients.
83. It can be seen from Table 3 that, apart from a hypothetical merger between Andersen
    France and KPMG and the hypothetical dispersion of Andersen France, in all other
    different situations analysed in scenario I and II, that the differences in the repartition
    of market shares regarding all possible alternatives to the operation are rather marginal
    compared to the market structure resulting from the proposed merger,. A hypothetical
    merger between Andersen France and KPMG and the hypothetical dispersion of
    Andersen France, however, would actually result in a more symmetric market
    structure than the proposed operation and therefore a potentially more problematic one
    with regard to collective dominance issues.
84. To exclude that any of the other alternatives could create a market structure, which
    could be less harmful for competition, it must be assessed whether the differences in
    the repartition of market shares (which would be created as a result of the proposed
    operation) could more likely create a situation of collective dominance than any of the
    possible alternatives. If this is not the case, it can be excluded that there would be a
    causal link between the merger proposed and a possible deterioration of the
    competitive structure in the market resulting from it.
                                                        22

85. In this respect, the market investigation has shown that, compared to the two
    scenarios, the operation proposed will not
      – increase the likelihood that each member of the oligopoly will have the ability to
         know how the other members are behaving (transparency) –first condition-
      – increase the likelihood that the tacit co-ordination would be sustainable over time
         and that there would be an incentive not to depart from the common policy on the
         market –second condition-;
      – increase the likelihood that competitors and clients would have no possibility to
         jeopardise the oligopolistic behaviour –third condition-.
      First condition
86. The proposed transaction does not have a different impact on the ability to monitor the
    competitors’ behaviour from any of the other possible scenarios. The possible increase
    in market transparency would result from the inevitable reduction of the market
    players from five to four. It could not result from small differences in market shares
    between the competitors.. In these circumstances the degree of market transparency
    will not be different as a result of the proposed transaction or of any other scenario.
87. In addition, if according to scenario II, Andersen France’s staff was dispersed and any
    further and key persons were equally spread among the Big Four firms, tacit collusion
    would be even more facilitated by this spread of common experience and by the
    creation of a network of personal links.
      Second condition
88. Second, it can be excluded that the marginal differences between the repartition of
    market shares between any alternative and the proposed transaction could change the
    incentives of the Big Four firms to depart from a possible common policy on the
    market. In fact, the market structure resulting from the proposed operation is not
    particularly symmetric since the merged entity would become a clear leader. Scenario
    II would also create a more symmetric market structure, which could in theory
    increase the risk of collusive behaviour. In addition in all alternative situations
    presented above, the four remaining competitors will have similar cost structures,
    since they will all have reached a critical mass in a market where the main resources
    are human resources and where there are limited economies of scale, once a firm
    passed a minimum size. The proposed operation is not more harmful in this respect
    than any of the other scenarios.
      Third condition
89. Finally, a different repartition of market shares between the remaining Big Four
    companies does not have any effect on the barriers to enter the now Big Four audit and
    accounting market and does therefore not affect the possibility of competitors to
    jeopardise the oligopolistic behaviour. The French COCAC system already provides
    potential entrant in this market with the means to exert some competition at the
    margins. Neither would a difference in the repartition of market shares change the
    client’s choice whether to invite one or another Big Four firm to a tender. In any case,
    the choice is reduced from five to four. Hence the clients’ ability to challenge a
    possible oligopoly is not different in any possible scenario compared to the proposed
    operation.
                                                  23

    Conclusion for the risk of collective dominance
90. In conclusion, it can be excluded that neither scenario I nor scenario II, which
    represent the only other possible alternatives to the proposed transaction, could create
    a market structure which could, compared with the market structure resulting from the
    proposed transaction, decrease the likelihood for collective dominance on the market
    for audit and accounting services for quoted and large companies. Therefore, there is
    no causal link between the proposed operation and a risk of collective dominance that
    would result from it.
2. Market for Tax Advisory services
91. The market investigation has shown that it could be considered that the market for tax
    advisory services might be further divided between international tax advisory services,
    and national tax advisory services.
92. In this case, the market for international tax advisory services would be similar to the
    market for the provision of audit and accounting services to large and quoted
    companies, in that the service requires an international network and there are few
    providers on the market. The market investigation has shown, however, that the Big
    Five are not the only service providers on this possible market for international tax
    advisory services in France. To a considerable extent big law firms, which either have
    an international network comparable to the one of the Big Five or usually co-operate
    with law firms in other countries are or at least could be active on this market.
93. Given the fact that a considerable number of big international firms are active on the
    same market, no competition concerns can arise in the possible market for tax advisory
    services with an international dimension. Furthermore, if such a market exists, this
    market would largely coincide with the market for audit and accounting services to
    international firms. Thus, the same reasoning and assessment can be carried out as
    above. Therefore, the transaction will not lead to the creation or strengthening of a
    dominant position on such a market.
VI. CONCLUSION
94. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                        For the Commission
                                                        Signed by Mario Monti
                                                        Member of the Commission
                                                  24
