                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 27/08/2002
                                                                 SG (2002) D/231406/407/408
  In the published version of this decision, some                        PUBLIC VERSION
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                   MERGER PROCEDURE
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
                                                                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.
                                                                 To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.2824 – Ernst & Young / Andersen Germany
               Notification of 23/07/2002 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
               No 4064/89
1. On 23/07/2002, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
     pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/891 (the “Merger
     Regulation”) by which the global Ernst & Young network (“Ernst & Young”) through
     its German undertakings Ernst & Young Deutsche Allgemeine Treuhand AG
     Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft, Aktionärsgemeinschaft von Partnern der Ernst &
     Young Deutsche Allgemeine Treuhand AG Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft GbR,
     Treuhand-Süd GmbH and Ernst & Young Stiftung e.V (collectively “Ernst & Young
     Germany”) merge within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger Regulation with
     both parts of the German entities of the Andersen network (i.e. Arthur Andersen
     Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft/Steuerberatungsgesellschaft mbH, Andersen Luther
     Rechtsanwaltsgesellschaft mbH, Gesellschaft des bürgerlichen Rechts der Gesellschafter
     von Andersen Luther Rechtsanwaltsgesellschaft mbH, Gesellschaft des bürgerlichen
     Rechts der deutschen Arthur Andersen Partner, Arthur Andersen Corporate Finance
     Beratung GmbH, Arthur Andersen Real Estate GmbH; collectively “Andersen
     Germany”) and the German undertaking Menold & Aulinger.
2. After examining the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
     operation falls within the scope of the Council Regulation No 4064/89 and that it does
     not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
     EEA Agreement.
1        OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
         Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

I.    THE PARTIES
3. Ernst & Young Germany is a member of the global Ernst & Young network of accounting
    and professional services firms, which employs over 83,000 people in 125 countries.
    Before the implosion of the network Andersen Germany was active as member firm of
    the Andersen Worldwide international network of accounting and professional services
    firms (“Andersen Worldwide”). Until recently the Andersen Worldwide member firms
    collectively employed approximately 85,000 people. Ernst & Young Germany as well as
    Andersen Germany (both consisting of several entities under the authority of one
    Managing Partner and a Partnership Council) are therefore the German branches of two
    of the so-called Big Five global accounting and professional services organisations.
    Apart from Andersen Worldwide and Ernst & Young, the other Big-Five firms are
    PricewaterhouseCoopers (“PwC”), Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (“DTT”), and KPMG.
4. Ernst & Young Germany and Andersen Germany are both active in the fields of the
    following professional services: audit and accounting services; tax advisory services and
    corporate finance advisory services. Andersen Germany provides legal advisory services
    through its associated law firm Andersen Luther, whereas Ernst & Young Germany
    provides a limited amount of legal advice through its legal department and co-operates
    with the law firm Menold & Aulinger. In addition, Andersen Germany is active in the
    provision of seminar and conference and business consultancy services. Ernst & Young
    is no longer active in the field of business consultancy.
5. Menold & Aulinger is a German partnership of 58 natural persons offering legal
    services, in particular, in the area of business law. Menold & Aulinger is member of the
    Ernst & Young law alliance without being integrated into the Ernst & Young
    international network.
II.   THE OPERATION
6. On 23 April 2002, Ernst & Young Germany and Andersen Germany entered into a Co-
    operation Agreement, which forms the framework for the entire transaction and
    comprises the tax and audit, the legal, as well as parts of Andersen Germany’s corporate
    finance business.
7. The combination of Ernst & Young Germany’s and Andersen Germany’s tax and audit
    businesses is structured in the following way. In the framework of the Co-operation
    Agreement, the tax and audit entities of Ernst & Young Germany and Andersen
    Germany entered into a business lease agreement according to which the Andersen
    Germany tax and audit entity leases its entire business to Ernst & Young Germany. As a
    consequence, Ernst & Young will operate Andersen Germany’s tax and audit business
    in the name and for the account of Ernst & Young, the employees of the Andersen tax
    and audit business will be transferred to Ernst & Young, and Andersen Germany’s
    partners shall become partners of the Ernst & Young civil law partnership in a similar
    way as the current Ernst & Young partners.
8. The combination of the legal branch of Andersen Germany and the law firm Menold &
    Aulinger and their integration into Ernst & Young are also dealt within the Co-operation
    Agreement. Ernst & Young and Andersen Germany agreed that the partners of
    Andersen Germany’s legal branch, Andersen Luther Rechtsanwaltsgesellschaft mbH
    (“Andersen Luther”), will set up a new entity to which the entire legal business of
    Andersen Germany is leased. As explicitly foreseen in the Co-operation Agreement,
    Menold & Aulinger acceded to the Agreement by letter of 17 May 2002 and thereby
                                                    2

    became party to the merger. The Co-operation Agreement provides further that the new
    entity will be […] member of the Ernst & Young law alliance in Germany and that it
    will be integrated into the Ernst & Young German and international network, to the
    extent legally possible and economically feasible.
9. A further agreement between Andersen Luther and Menold & Aulinger of 19 June 2002
    (“Partnership Agreement”) sets out the details of the integration [for merger control
    purposes] of Menold & Aulinger into Andersen Luther and ultimately into Ernst &
    Young. […] In consequence, the legal businesses of Andersen Germany and Menold &
    Aulinger will be combined and integrated into the Ernst & Young German and
    international network.
10. The parts of Andersen Germany’s corporate advisory services not requiring a banking
    licence, which are carried out by Andersen Corporate Finance Beratung GmbH, will be
    merged with Ernst & Young’s corporate finance business. Andersen Germany’s
    business consulting activity as well as those of Andersen Germany’s corporate advisory
    services, which require a banking licence, will be separated in the course of the
    transaction and will not form part of the transaction.
11. In order to combine all partners of Ernst & Young, Andersen Germany and Menold &
    Aulinger, the Co-operation Agreement finally foresees that […]
III. CONCENTRATION
12. The operation leads to a merger between Ernst & Young, which forms world-wide one
    single economic entity, Andersen Germany, which after the implosion of Andersen
    Worldwide’s network forms an economic entity independent from all other Andersen
    Worldwide entities, and Menold & Aulinger.
     Ernst & Young constitutes one single economic entity for the purpose of the application
     of the Merger Regulation
13. First, it has to be decided whether Ernst & Young’s international network constitutes a
    single economic entity for the purposes of the Merger Regulation and is, therefore, to be
    considered as an undertaking for the purposes of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger
    Regulation. For this purpose, it is necessary to examine whether the firms belonging to
    the Ernst & Young network share the same, permanent economic management and
    financial interests conferring to the network the character of a single economic entity for
    the purposes of the Merger Regulation.
14. The assessment of whether or not Ernst & Young is to be regarded as a single economic
    entity has to be made in the special and specific context of the audit and accounting
    market where there is an inherent economic incentive for member firms of the networks
    to act as a single economic entity. The key element for the economic success of a Big
    Five firm is the holding up of an international network, operating under a common
    brand name, and observing common professional rules and service standards which are
    centrally imposed on the member firms and centrally controlled. Furthermore, as
    discussed in a previous decision,2 each of the networks is de facto considered as one
2   Case IV/M.1016 – Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand, paragraph 118, OJ - L 050, 26/02/1999 p.27
                                                    3

    single economic entity showing a single behaviour on the market. Compared to
    franchise networks in which member firms active in different geographic markets hardly
    depend on each other, the Big Five member firms vitally depend on the centrally
    organised network the possibility of working together with their international partner
    firms and, also, on the reputation of each individual member firm of the network
15. In addition, even where no central distribution of revenues takes place between the
    individual member firms, strong common financial interest is established by the
    systematic referral of clients across the network. As the disintegration of the Andersen
    Worldwide network shows, the failure of one member firm of the network to comply
    with professional standards puts all other member firms at risk. This leads to the result
    that risks created by one member firm are shared among the network. This risk sharing
    is underlined by the existence of one single captive insurer for the business risks for all
    entities of the entire network.
16. These features are all present for the Ernst & Young network, whose member firms are
    linked to Ernst & Young Global –the central Ernst & Young entity - through a series of
    contractual relationships. […]
17. Members of the Ernst & Young network are moreover obliged […]
18. The described relationship with Ernst & Young Global applies to Ernst & Young
    Germany […] The remaining Ernst & Young member firms are integrated into the
    network via Ernst & Young International, the older and less integrated central
    governance entity of the Ernst & Young network. […]
19. However, Ernst & Young, irrespective whether assessed according to the Ernst &
    Young International or the Ernst & Young Global structure, can be considered to be a
    single economic entity. In the Ernst & Young Global structure, a clear permanent
    economic centralised management is established, supplemented by centrally formulated
    policies and centrally provided services. In the case of the Ernst & Young International
    structure, the member firms rely on the common brand name and its reputation, the
    world-wide network and the centrally developed and monitored professional standards
    and common client relationships. The strong economic links by sharing of risks
    [regarding insurance and reputation] and [sharing of] revenues on the basis of referrals
    also apply to the Ernst & Young International structure. These links are reinforced by
    the central co-ordination and facilitation of standards, strategies and initiatives and the
    provision of common services. As set out in a previous case for DTT3, these elements
    indicate a decisive degree of common economic management and common financial
    interest. They lead to the conclusion that Ernst & Young is to be considered as a single
    economic entity for the purposes of the Merger Regulation, irrespective in which
    structure this is assessed, and that Ernst & Young as a whole is one of the parties to the
    present transaction.
     Andersen Germany does not form part of the Andersen Worldwide network for the
     purpose of the application of the Merger Regulation
3       Case COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu/Andersen UK
                                                  4

20. Second, it has to be decided whether Andersen Germany forms the relevant economic
    undertaking for the purposes of the Merger Regulation or whether Andersen Worldwide
    still exists as a single economic entity. The latter conclusion would lead to the result
    that, in accordance with Article 5(2) of the Merger Regulation, all transactions between
    Andersen Worldwide and Ernst and Young would have to be considered as one and the
    same concentration.
21. The Commission’s investigation has shown that Andersen Worldwide is no longer able
    to discharge its core contractual obligations of co-ordinating the global development of
    the member firms’ practices world-wide, their commercial strategies and their
    management, as laid down in the contractual relationship between Andersen Worldwide
    and the national Andersen firms. This is notably demonstrated by the fact that the
    former member firms of the global Andersen network, each individually and without
    awaiting Andersen Worldwide's consent, have already joined or seek to join different
    networks of the remaining Big Four firms on a country-by-country basis. As a result of
    this disintegration, no central decision making process is any longer in place and the
    member firms do no longer operate under a common brand name and comply with
    common professional and service standards. For these reasons, Andersen Worldwide is
    no longer considered to constitute a single economic entity and a single undertaking for
    the purposes of the Merger Regulation.
22. Furthermore, following the crisis, Andersen Germany itself has terminated its
    membership in the Andersen network […] In any case, Andersen Germany considers
    that it is no longer bound by the terms of the contractual relationship with Andersen
    Worldwide […].
23. Given the above, Andersen Germany is to be regarded as the relevant economic
    undertaking for the purposes of the Merger Regulation.
     Menold Aulinger is an economic entity independent from Ernst & Young
24. The law firm Menold Aulinger, member of the legal network Ernst & Young Law
    Alliance, has to be considered as an economic entity independent from Ernst & Young.
    Ernst & Young Germany […]
     The merger between Ernst & Young, Andersen Germany and Menold Aulinger forms a
     single concentration
25. The operation includes the merger between Ernst & Young and Andersen Germany, on
    the one hand, and the merger between Andersen Germany and Menold & Aulinger, on
    the other hand. These two transactions constitute one concentration within the meaning
    of Article 3(1)(a) Merger Regulation. The merger of Ernst & Young, Andersen
    Germany and Menold & Aulinger has to be considered as a tri-lateral merger. The two
    transactions lead
      (1)      to a single economic entity comprising Ernst & Young, Andersen Germany
              and Menold & Aulinger, and
      (2)     are economically linked in a way that they are to be considered as a single
              transaction within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) Merger Regulation.
26. The new merged entity will combine Ernst & Young, Andersen Germany and Menold &
    Aulinger. Although the newly formed legal branch, called Luther Menold, will form a
    separate legal entity after the merger, it will be economically integrated into Ernst &
                                                  5

    Young and will share the same permanent economic management and financial
    interests, which is shown by the following facts.
27. First, it is intended to link the management of Ernst & Young and Luther Menold […]
    In general, already the Co-operation Agreement provides for a close integration of the
    legal branch into the Ernst & Young German and international network. Ernst & Young
    and Luther Menold are therefore considered to be a single economic entity for the
    purposes of the Merger Regulation.
28. The transactions are linked in a way that they constitute one concentration within the
    meaning of Article 3(1)(a) Merger Regulation. First, they are based on the same
    contractual document as Menold & Aulinger acceded to the Co-operation Agreement
    between Ernst & Young and Andersen Germany and exercised its right to take part in
    the merger. The formation of the partnership involving Andersen Germany’s legal
    branch and Menold & Aulinger is already a step in the implementation process of the
    merger. Second, the transactions are economically interdependent insofar as, on the one
    hand, the merger of Andersen Germany’s legal branch and Menold & Aulinger would
    not have taken place without the merger between Ernst & Young and Andersen
    Germany. […] Finally, it is envisaged that both transactions, provided that merger
    control clearance has been received, will be carried out simultaneously. It would, on the
    other hand, not reflect the economic reality to assess the transaction between Andersen
    Germany and Menold Aulinger as a separate concentration, as proposed by the Parties.
    Such an assessment would not take into account the close involvement of Ernst &
    Young into the process [for merger control purposes] and the final merger structure, […]
    and the fact that Ernst & Young simultaneously forms a single economic entity with
    Andersen Germany and Menold & Aulinger.
29. Given these economic links, the two transactions involving Ernst & Young and
    Andersen Germany, on the one hand, and Andersen Germany and Menold & Aulinger,
    on the other hand, have to be considered as one single concentration within Article
    3(1)(a) Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
30. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
    than EUR 5 billion4 (Ernst & Young €[…], Andersen Germany € […], excluding the
    management consultancy arm and those parts of the corporate finance branch not being
    part of the transaction, and Menold & Aulinger € […]) in 2001. Each of Ernst & Young
    and Andersen Germany have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million
    (Ernst & Young € […], Andersen Germany € […]), but they do not achieve more than
    two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same
    Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
4   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated
    into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                         6

A. RELEVANT PRODUCT MARKETS
31. Both Ernst & Young and Andersen, before the disintegration of its network, were
    considered as two of the “Big Five” global audit and accounting networks. Both parties
    are active in the provision of a broad range of professional services to clients, which
    consist mainly of large companies, of both a national and multinational dimension,
    spanning a broad spectrum of business sectors, as well as to clients in the public sector.
    According to a previous Commission decision5 the activities of the Big Five firms could
    be divided into the following relevant product markets:
        i) Audit and accounting services to quoted and large companies;
        ii) Audit and accounting services to small and medium-sized companies;
        iii) Tax advisory and compliance services;
        iv) Corporate finance advisory services.
32. Management consultancy services, which were also discussed in Price
    Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand are not considered in the present decision, as Ernst &
    Young is not active in management consultancy services and as Andersen Germany’s
    activity in this field is excluded from the transaction. In addition, the present transaction
    includes the provisions of v) legal advisory services.
i) Audit and accounting services to quoted and large companies
33. “Audit and accounting” services consist of the performance of statutory and other audits
    of companies’ accounts and other “audit-related” accounting services. In this context,
    “audit related” accounting services include such services as general accounting services,
    systems assurance, business risks assessment, internal audit, transaction services, in
    particular due diligence services and preparation of reports for stock exchange listings,
    and advice in international accounting standards6. The Parties have agreed to such an
    approach and the market investigation confirmed the categorisation of such audit-related
    services in the German market.
34. As regards the definition of a separate market for audit and accounting services to
    quoted and large companies the Commission’s market investigation focussed
     – on the question whether statutory audit and audit related services still belong to a
         single market,
     – on the question whether audit and accounting services to quoted and large
         companies, which are predominately provided by the Big Five global audit and
         account networks, form a distinct product market for the purpose of this decision,
         including the discussion of some German particularities.
     Statutory audit and audit related services belong to a single market
5   Cases COMP/M.2810 - Deloitte & Touche/Andersen UK, Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand quoted
    above, paragraphs 20,22
6   Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand; Case COMP/M.2810 Deloitte & Touche/Andersen UK,
    01/07/2002
                                                    7

35. Due to existing or new legal restrictions resulting from the Enron crisis and applied to
    German companies the Commission had to verify whether the range of services
    comprising statutory audit and audit related services constitute a single market or
    whether statutory audit should form a separate market. The investigation confirmed that
    some of these “audit-related” services cannot be provided by the incumbent statutory
    auditor to its client so that there is no perfect demand side substitutability among the
    entire range of services. In particular, as specified under German law, the statutory
    auditor may not be involved in internal audit services. The situation may be aggravated
    by the US Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 which prohibits registered public accounting
    firms from providing nine types of services to clients, comprising audit related services7.
    These provisions will in general also apply to German companies listed at a US stock
    exchange and therefore underlie SEC regulation. It can moreover be expected that this
    Act will trigger similar regulation in other countries.
36. However, the investigation confirmed that the prohibition to provide some audit related
    services to their statutory audit clients does not prevent the same firm from offering
    these services to other clients as similar expertise is needed for the provision of statutory
    audit and audit related services. Both kinds of services are therefore characterised by a
    clear supply-side substitutability. In addition, most of these services can still be
    provided together, also by the incumbent statutory auditor. Given these elements,
    statutory audit and audit related services are currently still to be considered as belonging
    to the same market.
      Audit and audit related services to quoted and large companies form a distinct product
      market
37. In previous decisions8, the Commission identified the following main reasons for which
    it considered that audit and accounting services to quoted and large companies form part
    of a separate product market: the necessity for such companies to have audit and
    accounting services provided by a firm with the necessary reputation in the financial
    markets (in the case of quoted companies), the geographic breath to cover the
    companies’ needs worldwide (in the case of multinationals), the depth of expertise in the
    particular sector (large companies in general and, in particular, regulated sectors such as
    banking and insurance) and significant resources (all large companies). The
    Commission concluded that only the worldwide active audit and accounting firms
    known at that time as the Big Six had both the geographic coverage and the degree of
    reliability with respect to financial statements required by the international capital
    markets, so that only they operated in the audit and accounting market for quoted and
    large international companies. The parties do not dispute this product market definition.
38. The market investigation in the present case confirmed the existence of a separate
    market for audit and accounting services to large and quoted companies which can only
7   (i) bookkeeping services relating to accounting records or financial statements of the client; (ii) financial
    information systems design and implementation; (iii) appraisal or valuation of services and fairness
    opinions; (iv) actuarial services; (v) internal audit outsourcing services; (vi) management functions or
    human resources; (vii) broker-dealer, investment adviser or investment banking services; (viii) legal or
    expert services unrelated to the audit; and (ix) any other service that the Board of the SEC determines to
    be impermissible.
8   Cases COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte & Touche/Andersen UK; IV/M.1016 - Price Waterhouse/Coopers &
    Lybrand,
                                                           8

    be provided by the Big Five audit firms. The vast majority of responding customers
    among large and quoted companies indicated that they would not consider second tier
    firms, including BDO -a second tier firm with a considerable, but far smaller
    international network than the Big Five firms- as substitutes for Big Five firms. The vast
    majority of large firms who had Andersen as their auditor replied that they would switch
    away from Andersen to another Big Five firm, if Andersen was not taken over by a Big
    Five firm. The customers in Germany saw as the most important differences between
    Big Five and second tier firms representing simultaneously the main reasons why they
    would only choose a Big Five auditor: the international network of the Big Five firms,
    their reputation in the financial markets, their professional know-how and their specific
    knowledge in international auditing and accounting standards (expertise in US-GAAP
    and IAS).
     German particularities of the relevant market
39. Several distinct features of the German market, however, have to be acknowledged.
    Unlike the situation in the UK9, where most large companies are also listed at the stock
    exchange, a considerable number of large German companies are privately owned and
    less dependent on capital markets. Even for German quoted companies an important
    number of large quoted companies are privately controlled. In consequence, these
    companies rely less on the recognition which their statutory auditor receives from
    shareholders, banks and capital markets, in particular from outside Germany, but it is
    more important for them that the auditing firm is being trusted by the private owner or
    controlling shareholder. For this reason, the number of quoted companies requiring a
    Big Five auditor only for the reputation in the capital markets appears to be considerably
    smaller in Germany than in the UK. A bigger number of large privately owned
    companies has to be included in the market than in the UK as they need to retain a Big
    Five auditor due to their widespread international activity. This also applies to listed but
    privately controlled companies which may require the resources of a Big Five auditor in
    order to cover their international activity although they do not need a Big Five auditor
    for their recognition in the capital markets.
40. A further feature of the German market is that in Germany the traditional relationship
    with an auditor seems to be even more important than in the UK and that changes of the
    statutory auditor rarely occur. The market investigation revealed that a large number of
    large German companies have not changed their statutory auditor for decades.
41. The market investigation has shown that, due notably to the peculiarities explained
    above, second-tiers and even smaller audit firms have clients among large German
    companies. This is in particular the case for BDO, which has a noticeable number of
    mandates among Germany’s large firms. A number of factors can explain this
    observation. In a large number of cases, this position seems to be based on a historical
    relationship of BDO with their German clients. Furthermore, as outlined above, a
    number of large German firms do not directly depend on the capital markets and do not
    need to retain an auditing firm for its reputation in the capital markets or for its
    knowledge in international accounting standards. This is even valid for listed but
    privately controlled companies, in particular if they do not intend to attract international
    investors. For such companies, it seems to be sufficient to retain BDO as statutory
    auditor provided they do not require one of the global auditing networks due to the
9   cf. Case COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte & Touche/Andersen UK.
                                                   9

     company’s worldwide activity. However, this does not mean that BDO in particular
     should be considered as being part of the audit and accounting services market for large
     and quoted companies, as it is defined for the purpose of this decision: the market
     investigation demonstrated that the vast majority of Big Five customers would not
     switch to second tier firms, including BDO, as for them BDO did not represent a
     suitable alternative.
      Conclusion
42. In conclusion, for the purposes of this decision it is considered that a distinct product
     market for audit and accounting services for large and quoted companies, exclusively
     served by Big Five firms, can be defined. This market comprises audit and accounting
     services to large quoted companies, whether national or international in dimension, as
     well as to large non-quoted companies. However, the Commission found some evidence
     that the gap between Big Five firms and in particular BDO, as second tier firm, is less
     significant in Germany than in other European countries. It can therefore be considered
     that BDO, in particular after the disintegration of the Andersen network, may exert some
     competitive pressure on the margin, even though it does not belong to the same market.
ii) Audit and accounting services to small and medium-sized companies
43. The market for audit and accounting services to small and medium-sized companies
     covers the audit and accounting services to all those companies, who do not require one
     of the features mentioned above, which can only be provided by one of the global audit
     and accounting networks.
iii) Tax advisory and compliance services
44. The market investigation showed some features, as in a previous case10, which could
     justify a definition of separate markets for services provided predominantly with regard
     to national tax legislation, and services with international dimension. Whereas national
     tax advice can be provided by a firm, which is only active in one country, the provision
     of international tax advice services can, in principle, be provided either by an
     international network or by co-operation of different national firms. The market
     investigation, however, indicated that for a significant number of customers the network
     solution is the preferred choice. However, it is not necessary for the purpose of this
     decision to define the market precisely, as the proposed operation does not lead to the
     creation or strengthening of a dominant position irrespective of the precise definition
     retained.
iv) Corporate Finance Advisory Services
45. As regards the market for the provision of corporate finance advisory services, the
     market investigation has confirmed the results of the case IV/M.1016 – Price
     Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand that this can be considered as distinct product market.
v) Legal Services
46. The market investigation has shown that there is a separate market for legal advice and
     gave some indications that there might be a separate market for business law. It showed
10   Case COMP/M.2810 Deloitte & Touche/Andersen UK, 01/07/2002
                                                    10

    some features, which could justify a definition of separate markets for services provided
    predominantly with regard to national legislation, and services with international
    dimension. In the same way as regarding tax advice, the provision of international legal
    advice can, in principle, be provided either by an international network or by co-
    operation of different national firms. The market investigation indicated that for a
    significant number of customers the network solution is the preferred choice. However,
    it is not necessary for the purpose of this decision to define the market precisely, as the
    proposed operation does not lead to the creation or strengthening of a dominant position
    irrespective of the precise definition retained.
B. RELEVANT GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS
47. As regards the geographic dimension of the relevant product markets for i) audit and
    accounting services to quoted and large companies, ii) audit and accounting services to
    small and medium-sized companies, and iii) tax advisory and compliance services the
    Commission has stated in case IV/M.1016 – Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand that
    these markets are national in scope. The reasons given were in particular significant
    national differences for the services’ main features such as the specific professional
    expertise required, applicable regulations, and the relevant laws for which the above
    mentioned advisory services are provided. The market investigation has confirmed the
    national scope of these product markets, as these features of the market have not
    changed to date.
48. With regard to the geographic markets for iv) corporate finance advisory services, the
    Commission has already recognised the existence of both national and international
    aspects for the provision of these services. In the absence of competition concerns, the
    Commission did not have to conclude on the geographic scope of these markets. As the
    market investigation has not raised new elements in this respect, and as these two
    markets do not lead to the creation or the strengthening of a dominant position
    irrespective of the precise definition of the markets’ geographic scope, the Commission
    does not need to deviate from its previous approach for the purpose of the present case.
49. If a separate market for tax advisory services with international dimension were to be
    considered, the market investigation has indicated that such a market would show some
    national characteristics. Tax advice on international matters is linked to the national tax
    law of the advice seeking company and therefore presupposes knowledge of the national
    tax regime under which the company is operating. The company will therefore normally
    liase on matters with an international character with its national tax adviser, who will
    then usually co-operate with experts - either from the network or from independent co-
    operating firms - in the jurisdiction where the other end of the operation in question is
    located. The precise definition of the geographic scope of such a possible market,
    however, can be left open, as the proposed operation does not create or strengthen a
    dominant position irrespective of the geographic delineation of the market chosen. The
    same line of reasoning applies to a possible market for legal advice with international
    dimension. Also for this possible market the precise delineation of the market can be left
    open as the proposed operation does not create or strengthen a dominant position
    irrespective of the geographic definition of the market chosen.
                                                   11

C. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
50. The transaction will lead to horizontal overlaps in all the relevant markets mentioned
    above. The parties’ combined market shares will, however, only exceed 15 % in the
    German audit and accounting services market for quoted and large companies and the
    German tax advisory services market with an international dimension, assuming that
    such a market exists. Therefore the competition assessment of the transaction will focus
    on the markets for 1) audit and accounting services to quoted and large companies, and
    the possible market for 2) tax advisory and compliance services with an international
    dimension.
51. On all other relevant markets deterioration of competition can be excluded, as the
    parties combined market shares will be well below 15% and the clients’ choice of
    service providers in these areas is not limited to the Big Five audit and accounting firms.
    Audit and accounting services to small and medium-sized companies can be provided by
    a large number of smaller audit and accounting firms active in Germany. For corporate
    finance advisory services the parties are in competition with the large investment banks.
    Regarding the provision of legal services the parties compete with a large number of law
    firms providing legal advice in the field of business law, a significant number of which
    are integrated into international networks.
1. Market for audit and accounting services for quoted and large companies
a) Market shares in the relevant market
52. The calculation of market shares for the relevant market requires in a first step the
    definition of the sample, which gives the best approximation for the German market for
    audit and accounting services for quoted and large companies. In a second step the best
    estimates of market shares for this sample has to be established.
     Relevant sample for the German audit and accounting services market for large and
     quoted companies
53. No categorisation defining the sample of companies for the market for audit and
    accounting services for quoted and large companies is available. The market
    investigation has shown that the companies belonging to the DAX and the MDAX (the
    largest 100 companies listed on the Frankfurt stock exchange, further referred to as
    “DAX 100”) or to the German Top 300 companies according to their turnover (the
    smallest Top 300 company achieves a turnover of € 1,800 million) would represent a
    suitable approximation for the relevant market. However, companies belonging to the
    sample may only be taken into account if competition for the statutory audit of these
    companies takes place at the level of those companies. The market investigation showed
    that in the large majority of groups the decision upon selecting the auditing firm is taken
    centrally for the whole group even if this decision may be implemented separately for
    each group member according to the requirements of applicable company law. Thus,
    subsidiaries have been taken out of the sample. Exceptions from this rule have to be
    made for quoted subsidiaries. The market investigation revealed that some of the quoted
    subsidiaries have different auditors than their parent companies. This indicates that the
    shareholders’ general meeting, including the minority shareholders, may also de facto
    determine the choice of the statutory auditor. For similar reasons, 50/50 joint ventures
    between different parent companies are included in the sample. The decision about the
    statutory auditor of such a joint venture cannot be determined centrally on the group
                                                  12

    level, but the parent companies have to agree on the level of the joint venture where also
    competition takes place.
54. Finally subsidiaries of groups which are headquartered outside of Germany have been
    excluded from the sample. The market investigation showed that the vast majority of
    international groups decide centrally about the auditors of their subsidiaries, irrespective
    of the country in which the subsidiary is located. However, even if such referred-in work
    for auditing firms is not taken into account for the calculation shares in the German
    market, such work must be taken into account when it comes to the assessment of the
    their entire competitive potential on the German market. Referred-in work gives the
    auditing firms the possibility to build up the resources for auditing and accounting work
    in order to be a credible bidder for companies directly belonging to the German market.
55. In conclusion, the Commission found that the best approximation for the relevant
    sample for the German audit and accounting services market for large and quoted
    companies consists of DAX 100 and German Top 300 companies excluding non-listed
    subsidiaries, jointly controlled joint ventures and referred-in work. Thereby, only the
    number of actual Big Five mandates is taken into account. This seems to lead to a more
    accurate approximation of the market for audit and accounting work for large and
    quoted companies as those companies represent the customers who need to retain a Big
    Five auditor for at least one of the reasons given above and who therefore are not in a
    position to switch to a second tier audit firm. On this basis, the sample comprises 152
    companies.
   Calculation of market shares
56. The Commission was faced with considerable difficulties to calculate market shares on
    the basis of this sample, As there is no publicly available data on the German market.
    The parties proposed to calculate market shares on the basis of the published turnover
    figures of the Big Five firms in the audit and accounting market. However, these figures
    comprise the total turnover achieved by the Big Five firms in the audit and accounting
    market and do not match the relevant market defined above. The total turnover of the
    firms can therefore only be used in order to double-check the market shares established
    on a basis closer to the sample. It also proved difficult to rely on data provided by the
    Parties and their Big Five competitors regarding their turnover for the relevant sample as
    all Big Five firms had significant difficulties to re-calculate the required data on the
    basis of data collected for their internal purposes.
57. The Commission therefore decided to calculate market shares on the basis of the number
    of statutory audit mandates. This method can rely on publicly available data since the
    statutory auditor of large companies is published in the annual reports, which have to be
    submitted to the publicly accessible commercial register. Using these figures it has to be
    borne in mind that the number of statutory audit mandates does not necessarily
    correspond to the position in audit related work. It can, however, be considered as a
    suitable approximation since the number of statutory audit mandates appears to be a key
    factor for the competitive position on the relevant market in Germany.
58. The market share data for the sample on the basis of number of mandates can be
    summarised as follows.
                                                   13

                              Table 1 Market shares by number of mandates
 Financial        Andersen          E&Y       Andersen         PwC         KPMG            DTT
 Year 2001        Germany                      + E& Y
Number of              9             15           24             57           61             9
 Mandates
   Market             6%            9.9%        15.9%         37.7%         40.4%           6%
   share
59. The market shares on the basis of number of mandates can be cross-checked by taking
    into account the turnover of Big Five for all audit and accounting work for the year
    2001. Thereby, the audit related work carried out by Big five firms in the market for
    large and quoted companies and referred work is taken into account as well as the audit
    and accounting work in the market for small and medium-sized companies.
               Table 2 Market shares by turnover for audit and accounting services
Financial           Andersen       E&Y      Anderse     KPMG            PwC           DTT
Year 2001           Germany                 n + E&Y
Turnover in […]                    […]      […]         […]             […]           […]
EUR million
Share of total [10-20]%            [10-     [20-        [30-40]%        [30-40]%      [5-15]%
Big        Five                    20]%     40]%
turnover
Source according to Parties: Publicly available figures and internal data of the parties.
b) General characteristics of the market
60. Before assessing the impact of the transaction on competition in the market for audit and
    accounting services for quoted and large companies, it is useful to outline the conditions
    of competition in this market. Under German law, companies are required to have their
    accounts annually audited by a qualified auditor. In public companies, the Supervisory
    Board will propose an auditing firm which will be formally appointed by the
    shareholders at the annual general meeting. In selecting the auditor, large companies
    typically use a competitive tender process, which may be more or less formal. They
    invite several firms (generally not more than three or four) to submit a proposal. For
    quoted and large companies, the competition for audit and accounting services therefore
    operates at the moment of such competitive tenders. The investigation revealed that the
    length of time for which audit firms are retained tend to be even more long-term in
    Germany than in the UK11. Even if the shareholders in each annual general meeting
    have to approve the auditor again, the norm is that appointed auditors will be renewed
    and that the auditor-client relationship can last many years. Despite such a renewal in
    favour of the incumbent auditor, launching an invitation to tenders imposes a
11  cf. for the situation in the UK Case COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte & Touche/Andersen UK; in general Price
    Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand, quoted above, paragraphs 20,22
                                                     14

    competitive constraint on the incumbent auditor and may lead to a re-negotiation of the
    fees.
61. The Commission’s investigation showed that the respective market shares among the
    Big Five did not fully reflect the ability to win a tender. The market investigation has
    shown that customers view any of the Big Five as a credible bidder in a competitive
    tender.
c) Single dominance
62. The combination of the parties’ market shares (15.9% by number of mandates) will only
    result in the creation of the third largest player in the market, which will be significantly
    smaller than the market leaders PWC and KPMG. The market leaders have each a
    market share of around 40%. Therefore the proposed operation will not result in the
    creation of a single dominant position.
d) Collective dominance
63. In case IV/M.1016 – Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand quoted above, the
    Commission considered that the market characteristics of the audit and accounting
    market for quoted and large companies could, in principle, lead to collective dominance.
    On the demand side, the Commission considered, in particular, that there was moderate
    growth in the market and a low price elasticity of demand. On the supply side, the
    Commission considered the existence of a high concentration, high market transparency
    for a rather homogeneous product, mature production technology and structural links
    between competitors. Finally the Commission considered that high barriers to entry
    characterise this market, in particular, due to the audit firm’s required broad
    geographical network, extensive human resources required, and a well established
    reputation which has been built up over a significant period of time.
64. However, the Commission found no conclusive proof that such dominance resulted from
    the relevant operation in the (then) Big Six market. The Commission concluded that ‘in
    view of the continued post-merger existence of no fewer than five suppliers, of the
    likely continued participation of these five suppliers in the tender offers which constitute
    the competitive process in the relevant markets, and of the non-emergence of any two
    clear leading firms following the merger; the Commission has found no conclusive
    proof that the reduction from six to five players would create or strengthen a position of
    oligopolistic or duopolistic dominance within any of the national Big Six markets for
    audit and accounting services to large companies within the Community.’12
65. As the transaction leads to a reduction in the number of market participants from five to
    four in the audit and accounting market for quoted and large companies in Germany, it
    has to be considered that the transaction could lead to the creation or strengthening of a
    collective dominant position. However, on the basis of the market characteristics in
    Germany, as outlined above, there does not appear to be a risk that the present
    transaction creates or strengthens a position of collective dominance in such a market.
66. Unlike the UK market, as described in Case COMP/M.2810 – Deloitte &
    Touche/Andersen UK, the German market is characterised by a structure of two clear
12  Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand, quoted above, paragraph 119
                                                    15

    market leaders, KPMG and PWC. Both firms together account for nearly 80% of the Big
    Five mandates. The parties would have a combined share of 15.8%, DTT, as smallest
    player, has a share of 5.9% of the Big Five mandates. These figures may even overstate
    the market position of the parties in the immediate future. As a number of clients
    defected from Andersen Germany following the loss of reputation due to the Enron
    affair and as conflicts of interests will arise for several of the clients of the combined
    Ernst&Young and Andersen Germany entity, it is expected that the market share of the
    merged entity will be lower than the combined market shares of both undertakings
    which reflect the status of 2001.
67. The advantage of the market leaders in terms of total turnover in audit and accounting
    over the parties and DTT, as shown in Table 2, is less significant than the advantage in
    terms of market shares. KPMG and PWC are the clear leaders also in terms of turnover
    achieved in audit and accounting work. The parties would have a combined share of
    [20- 40%] of the total turnover of the Big Five, DTT around [5-15%]%. This may,
    beside the inclusion of the turnover resulting from audit and accounting activities
    carried out for small and medium-sized companies, be explained in particular by the
    comparatively stronger position of the parties and DTT in audit related work and in
    referrals. Nevertheless, even on the basis of turnover figures including the entire audit
    and accounting work done by these companies, KPMG and PWC are the clear leaders
    and have a similar position, the combined entity would be third with a considerable
    distance and DTT is the fourth player on the market, significantly smaller than the
    combined entity.
68. The Commission considers that, given the significant asymmetries between the players,
    the market structure in this case is not conducive to collusive behaviour between the two
    leading market players and the merged entity or between all four market participants.
    This market structure does not provide incentives for the merged entity to collude with
    the market leaders as it has more to gain by an increase of its market share. Even in the
    contrary, it could be considered that the merged parties might be in a position to close
    the gap between them and the two market leaders by making use of their enlarged
    resources.
69. Given the above position of the parties in the market, the Commission does not consider
    that the concentration leads to a substantial alteration to competition as it stands.
    Therefore, unlike in the UK market, the Commission does not see a risk that the
    concentration could lead to the creation or strengthening of a dominant position.
2. Market for Tax Advisory services
70. The market investigation has shown that it could be considered that the market for tax
    advisory services might be further divided between international tax advisory services,
    and national tax advisory services.
71. In this case, the market for international tax advisory services would be similar to the
    market for the provision of audit and accounting services to large and quoted companies,
    in that the service requires an international network and there are few providers on the
    market. The market investigation has shown, however, that the Big Five are not the only
    service providers on this possible market for international tax advisory services in
    Germany. To a considerable extent big law firms, which either have an international
    network comparable to the one of the Big Five or usually co-operate with law firms in
    other countries are or at least could be active on this market.
                                                   16

72. Given the fact that a considerable number of big international firms are active on the
    same market, no competition concerns can arise in the possible market for tax advisory
    services with an international dimension. Furthermore, if such a market exists, this
    market would largely coincide with the market for audit and accounting services to
    international firms. Thus, the same reasoning and assessment can be carried out as
    above. Therefore, the transaction will not lead to the creation or strengthening of a
    dominant position on such a market.
VI. CONCLUSION
73. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC)
    No 4064/89.
                                                     For the Commission
                                                     Signed by Michaele Schreyer
                                                     Member of the Commission
                                                17
