                      COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, le 05.11.2002
                                                                 SG (2002) D/232472
   In the published version of this decision, some
                                                                         PUBLIC VERSION
   information has been omitted pursuant to
   Article 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No
   4064/89 concerning non-disclosure of business
                                                                      MERGER PROCEDURE
   secrets and other confidential information. The
   omissions are shown thus […]. Where possible                    ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
   the information omitted has been replaced by
   ranges of figures or a general description.
                                                                 To the notifying party
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.2970 – GE/ABB Structured Finance
               Notification of 01.10.2002 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
               No 4064/891
1. On 01.10.2002, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
    pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/891 by which the US
    undertaking General Electric Capital Corporation (“GE Capital”), a wholly owned
    subsidiary of the General Electric Corporation (“GE”), acquires, within the meaning of
    Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation, sole control over the major part of ABB’s
    Structured Finance businesses (“ABB SF”) by way of purchase of shares and assets.
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
    operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and that the concentration
    does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with
    the EEA agreement.
I.    THE PARTIES
3. GE Capital is the holding company for the global financial services division of GE,
    which is a diversified manufacturing, technology and services company active in various
    fields including aircraft engines, appliances, financial services, information services,
    power generation equipment, lighting, industrial systems, medical systems, plastics,
    broadcasting and transportation equipment.
1   OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
    Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

4. The ABB Group, incorporated in Switzerland, is a global supplier of power and
    automation technologies to utility and industry customers in more than 100 countries.
    ABB SF comprises the majority of ABB’s Structured Finance business, which itself
    currently forms one arm of ABB’s Financial Services division.
II.   THE CONCENTRATION
5. Following a Sale and Purchase Agreement with ABB Financial Services B.V., a
    subsidiary of ABB Ltd, dated 04.09.2002, GE, though GE Capital, will acquire sole
    control over the businesses, companies and assets comprising ABB SF. The notified
    transaction excludes the assets of ABB Export Bank, ABB’s Financial Advisory
    services, as well as ABB’s 35% stake in Swedish Export Credit Corporation and ABB’s
    aircraft leasing business. The business, assets and companies making up ABB SF will
    be integrated into GE’s corporate structure and in particular GE Capital’s Commercial
    Finance division as a result of the notified transaction. The operation therefore
    constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover of more
    than EUR 5 Bio (EUR 141 023 Mio for GE and over EUR [...] Mio for ABB SF in
    2001).2 Each of GE and ABB SF have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR
    250 million (EUR [...] Mio for GE and EUR [...] Mio for ABB SF in 2001), but they do
    not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within
    one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community
    dimension. It does not constitute a co-operation case under the EEA Agreement.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
7. GE, through its GE Capital Commercial Finance unit is active in financial services and
    products to businesses of all sizes on a worldwide basis. In particular, with a focused
    expertise on the medium-sized companies, GE Commercial Finance provides loans,
    operating leases and financing programs. It also offers loans and financing leases for
    major capital assets, including a full range of aircraft fleet and financing solutions;
    industrial facilities and equipment, and energy-related facilities as well as loans to and
    investments in public and private entities in diverse industries.
8. ABB SF mainly offers syndicated debt financing and various infrastructures financing
    solutions to industrial customers as well as lease-based finance solutions to business
    equipment purchasers and higher value business assets.
9. The only affected markets are those of business equipment leasing in Norway and
    Sweden where the combined shares reach [between 10 and 20%].
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated
    into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                         2

    A. RELEVANT PRODUCT MARKETS
10. The parties submit that the relevant product market encompasses all financing methods
    by which customers may seek to acquire the use of any type of asset. This approach is
    based on the suggestion that, whenever deciding to acquire the use of an asset, potential
    customers would likely be considering, first of all, whether to use their internal
    resources as a source of funds. In addition, whenever customers would choose to
    dismiss outright ownership of the assets, the parties have claimed that a wide variety of
    financial products and services can serve asset use financing purposes. Consequently,
    the parties have argued that the relevant product market should include, at least, loans,
    leasing arrangements as well as other forms of credit on differing terms provided by
    banks, other financial companies and financial subsidiaries of original business
    equipment manufacturers (“OEM”) or vendors.
11. On top of the strong substitutability between the different financial products, the parties
    further argue that barriers to entry are low especially when commercial banks with
    existing distribution networks are taken into account as likely to offer competing offers
    in response to small and permanent changes in relative prices.
13. The question was raised about the exclusion of OEM’s financing activities
    accompanying direct equipment sales to customers in the market on the basis of their
    alleged absence from the so-called competitive or “merchant” market resulting from
    their incentive, as opposed to the “non-affiliated” players, to link the provision of such
    financial services with the supply of their own equipment.
14. In addition, the possibility of a further delineation of the market according to the
    customers’ category i.e. small and medium-sized enterprises (“SMEs”) versus
    multinational companies (“MNCs”) was suggested by the results of the market
    investigation on the basis that purchasing patterns, competition conditions and prices
    could differ from one customer category to the other. Based on the same reasoning, a
    possible further segmentation according to the main activity sectors of customers such as
    manufacturing, telecommunications, energy companies, public or private administrative
    bodies, etc. was also submitted.
15. Without dismissing the broader product market definition submitted by the parties as
    described above, the results of the market investigation carried out by the Commission
    nevertheless indicate a tendency towards a segmentation of the relevant product market
    according to the type of the financial solutions actually provided, e.g. leasing vs other
    types of financial products such as various kinds of loan arrangements. Such
    segmentation would mainly be based on demand side considerations such as inter alia
    customers’ preference for the accounting (e.g. on- or off-balance sheet) of one product
    versus another.
16. Regarding a possible further segmentation according to the customers’ category i.e.
    SMEs versus MNCs, while it is acknowledged that the creditworthiness of a customer,
    rather than its actual size, might play a role in both the provision of a financing and the
    conditions at which it is provided, the results of the Commission’s market investigation
    do not reveal indications of possible price discriminations that would warrant such a
    further market delineation. The same reasoning applies to the argument of a possible
    segmentation of the product market according to the main activity sectors of customers.
17. Notwithstanding the above considerations, for the purpose of this case, it is however not
    necessary to further define the market as the concentration would not result in the creation
                                                    3

    or the strengthening of a dominant position in the EEA or any substantial part of it on any
    such or alternative market definition considered.
    B. RELEVANT GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS
18. While the Commission has, in a number of previous decisions, indicated that the
    geographical dimension of competition is national for many aspects of corporate finance
    and lending services to SMEs3, but that it may be wider than national for lending
    services to larger corporations, the parties argue that the market for business equipment
    leasing is increasingly extending beyond national borders and would be taking place at
    regional or even global level in certain cases.
19. While the results of the market investigation tend to confirm this growing approach
    towards cross-border leasing agreements especially for larger customers such as MNCs
    present in several countries and co-ordinating their activities with a limited number of
    international suppliers, they nevertheless also show that it remains very much national
    for the majority of the smaller customers. However, for the purpose of the proposed
    transaction, the exact geographic market definition can be left open, since on any
    possible geographic market definition, the concentration does not raise competition
    concerns.
    C. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
20. This transaction expands GE Commercial Finance’s global reach in project financing,
    particularly in the energy, transportation, and infrastructure sectors as well as GE’s
    equipment finance activities especially across Europe.
Horizontal Effects
21. On the basis of the market identified by the parties, business equipment leasing in
    Norway and Sweden, the combined shares would reach [10-20%].
22. In Sweden, the combined share would raise to [20-30%]. On an individual basis, the
    merged entity would be the largest single player on that market with Telia closely
    following with a [15-25%] share and Barcken with an estimated [10-20%] share. The
    aggregate share of the banks is estimated at between [35-45%] and that of the OEM
    financial arms between [10-20%].
23. In Norway, the picture is somewhat similar with the share of the merged entity reaching
    around [20-30%] and that of Telia between [10-20%]. Given the absence of an
    additional non-affiliated player such as Barcken in Sweden, the banks’ aggregate share
    ranges around [40-50%] with the OEMs estimated at [10-20%].
24. While the results of the Commission’s market investigation did not yield any clear-cut
    evidence as to a possible partial or total exclusion of the OEM’s financial subsidiaries
    from the competitive market, a recalculation of the market shares excluding them as a
    whole does not raise any further competition concerns as a result of the proposed
    transaction since, in such a worst case scenario, the merged entity would reach markets
3  For example, Case M. 1018 – GE Capital/Woodchester (07.11.1997) and Case M. 1910 –
   Meritanordbanken/Unidanmark, (10.04.2000).
                                                    4

    shares of [25-35%] and [25-35%] in Sweden and Norway respectively with enough
    established suppliers available to customers in both cases.
25. The impact of the notified transaction on the possible further delineated markets
    according to the customers’ category (i.e., SMEs and MNCs) was carefully considered
    in the Commission’s market investigation. Should such hypothetical segmentation
    prevail, as submitted by some of the respondents to the market investigation, the results
    of the Commission’s investigation indicate that the structure of the market, both for the
    SMEs and the MNCs, will not be significantly altered as a result of the proposed
    combination.
26. More particularly, the merged entity’s share of a possible market for SMEs will remain
    below its share of the business equipment leasing market as a whole. Indeed, while GE
    does not currently have a strong presence in the SMEs segment, ABB SF does not show
    a particular specialisation in the provision of leases to small undertakings either. The
    results of the market investigation further confirmed that the relativity low barriers to
    entry and the absence of significant barriers to expansion further enhance the intensity of
    competition on both affected markets. Such reasoning is essentially based on the fact
    that the average ticket price of the leased items varies around EUR [...], which as such is
    within the reach of the vast majority of financial institutions, and that no exclusive
    distribution channel is needed to start up in that business as, for example, finance
    companies desiring to enter the market could very well establish trading agreements
    either with vendors or with OEMs directly. Therefore, potential competitors, such as
    pan-European financial operators would be able to discipline the market should supra-
    competitive pricing take place.
27. The same conclusions apply as far as the competitive impact on a possible further
    market segmentation according to the various sectors of activities of customers is
    concerned.
Vertical Effects
28. Given GE’s current and ABB’s earlier involvement as manufacturers of power systems
    equipment such as gas turbines4, and their ongoing activities as suppliers of financing
    means to power generation projects, it is necessary to assess the potential competitive
    impact of the proposed transaction on those vertically related markets.
29. However, given ABB’s de minimis participation (estimated at less than 1%) in the
    power project financing business, the addition of ABB SF to GE could not conceivably
    be considered to produce any appreciable competitive effect on the power generation
    markets where GE is active.5
4   ABB sold its power generation activities to Alstom (France) in two steps: a) 50/50 joint venture with
    Alstom approved by the Commission on 02.06.1999 (Case M. 1484 – Alstom/ABB) and b) complete
    divestiture to Alstom approved by the Commission on 05.05.2000 (Case M. 1909 – Alstom/ABB Alstom
    Power).
5   The proposed transaction will not have any competitive impact on the market for large commercial
    aircraft engines where GE holds a share beyond [between 0% and 50%], as ABB will retain the bulk of its
    aircraft financing portfolio (approximately 21 aircraft and 30 helicopters with a value [below USD 100
    mio] will be acquired by GE).
                                                          5

V.    CONCLUSION
30. In light of the above, the Commission has concluded that the proposed transaction is not
    likely to create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
    competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
    area.
31. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC)
    No 4064/89.
                                                     For the Commission
                                                     signed by
                                                     Mario MONTI
                                                     Member of the Commission
                                                6
