                      COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 04/02/2003 *
                                                                 SG (2002) D/228383-84
     In the published version of this decision,                          PUBLIC VERSION
     some information has been omitted
     pursuant to Article 17(2) of Council
     Regulation      (EEC)        No        4064/89                   MERGER PROCEDURE
     concerning non-disclosure of business
     secrets      and      other       confidential                ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
     information. The omissions are shown
     thus […]. Where possible the information
     omitted has been replaced by ranges of
     figures or a general description.
To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:      Case No COMP/M.2982 – Lazard LLC / Intesa BCI / JV
              Notification of 20 December 2002 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
              Regulation No 4064/891
1. On 20 December 2002 the Commission received a notification of a concentration
    pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 (“Merger Regulation”)
    by which the undertakings Intesa BCI S.p.A. (“Intesa”) and Lazard LLC (“Lazard)
    intend to acquire, within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation, joint
    control of an undertaking, which will constitute a joint venture.
2. After examining the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
    operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and that it does not raise
    serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market.
1   OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
    Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

I.    THE PARTIES
3. Intesa is an Italian undertaking active, through its controlled entities, in the banking and
    bank assurance sectors as well as in the financial brokerage, assets management, leasing
    and factoring sectors.
4. Lazard is a world-wide leader provider of investment banking services such as financial
    strategic advice, mergers and acquisition and divestitures, corporate restructuring, take-
    over defences, special committee assignments, strategic partnerships and joint ventures
    and capital raising activities.
II.   THE OPERATION
5. On 21 November 2002 Lazard and Intesa signed an agreement (“the Agreement”)
    providing for the establishment of the joint venture (“JV”). According to the agreement,
    Lazard will contribute to an existing corporate vehicle the assets and resources currently
    used to carry out its Italian investment banking business. In particular Lazard will
    transfer most of the personnel currently active in the Italian investment banking business
    (around 60 persons), some intangible assets (including software, leasehold improvement
    and goodwill) and some tangible assets (including furniture electronic office equipment
    and motor vehicles).
6. Thereafter Intesa will subscribe to a capital increase of the JV for USD 100 million in
    exchange for an interest in the JV equal to 40 % of the paid up capital of the JV. Intesa
    will also purchase from the JV a subordinated loan note for a total consideration of USD
    50 million.
7. The Agreement provides that the initial term of the JV relationship will end on 31
    December 2007. However this term will be extended for successive 5 year terms unless
    and until terminated by written notice by one of the parties, delivered at least 90 days
    prior to the next renewal date.
8. The JV will provide the investment banking services listed in the Agreement2 to
    customers or potential customers identified as Italian Parties3 in the Agreement. The
    Agreement provides that these services will be provided to customers other than those
    who have consolidated gross revenues of less than EURO 450 million. It is intended that
    Intesa will continue to provide M&A advisory services to those clients that have
    consolidated gross revenues of less than EURO 450 million.
2 [Business Secret]
3 [Business Secret]
                                                  3

III. CONCENTRATION
Joint control
9. After the completion of the concentration, Intesa will have a 40 % interest and Lazard
    will have a 60 % interest in the JV. The Agreement provides that Intesa and Lazard will
    be entitled to appoint three members of the Board of Directors each. To be validly
    adopted, Resolutions of the Board will require the approval of at least four Board
    members. The Agreement provides, furthermore, that the Board will have the power to
    review the budget and the business plan. The day-to-day management will be carried out
    by Lazard.
10. Both the Chairman and the CEO of the JV will be selected by Lazard following
    consultation with the CEO of Intesa. In the event that the CEO of Intesa does not
    consent to the dismissal of the Chairman and, notwithstanding such dissent, Lazard
    proceeds with such dismissal Intesa BCI shall have the right to terminate the JV.
11. With regard to the shareholders meetings, the parties have agreed that the shareholders
    will follow the Board’s recommendations with respect to voting, to the fullest extent
    permitted by Italian law.
12. In conclusion in view of the governance arrangements relating to the way in which the
    JV will take key strategic decisions and of Intesa’s substantial ownership position and
    equal board representation, which give it an effective veto power over Board actions, it
    can be concluded that the parties will have joint control of the joint venture.
Full function character
13. Since Lazard will contribute to the JV the assets and resources currently used to carry
    out its Italian investment banking business, the JV will be able to perform the functions
    normally carried out by undertakings operating in the markets for M&A and equity
    capital investment advisory services in Italy. Lazard will supply some services
    (management services, IT services and Insurance) to the JV. However, as these services
    are not crucial to the operation of the JV and as the JV could easily obtain them from
    third parties, this will not alter the full function nature of the JV.
14. With regard to the duration of the JV, the Commission in a previous case has concluded
    that a joint venture established for an initial term of 5 years, subject to renewal is a
    period sufficiently long in order to bring about a lasting change in the structure of the
    undertakings concerned. The JV will therefore perform on a lasting basis all the
    functions of an economic entity.4.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
15. The combined aggregate world-wide turnover of all the undertakings concerned for the
    year 2001 exceeds 5000 million EURO and both Intesa and Lazard generated in the
    same fiscal year more than 250 million EURO within the Community. Although Intesa
4 Case IV/M.152 – Volvo/Atlas, para 8.
                                                      4

     achieved more than two-thirds of its Community-wide turnover within Italy Lazard did
     not achieve more than two-thirds of its Community-wide turnover in one and the same
     Member State. Therefore the concentration has a Community dimension pursuant to Art.
     1 (2).
V.    MARKET DEFINITION
Relevant product markets
16. As mentioned above, the JV will provide investment-banking services as listed in the
     Agreement, including both M&A and capital markets advisory services. According to
     the Commission’s previous decisions, investment-banking services constitute a segment
     within the overall banking sector5. The Commission has further segmented the
     investment banking sector so as to distinguish M&A advisory services from other
     investment banking services, such as securities and derivatives trading and foreign
     exchange trading.
17. M&A advisory services consist in providing corporate advice on acquisitions and
     disposals by trade purchases/sales, public bids, privatisation, corporate restructuring,
     corporate rescues and advice on de-mergers6.
18. In one case the Commission distinguished, without taking a definitive view on product
     markets definitions, M&A advisory services from Initial Public Offering (“IPO”)
     advisory services and equity and debt underwriting7.
19. However for the purpose of the present case it is not necessary to define conclusively
     the relevant product markets because, even on the basis of the narrowest market
     definition, the concentration does not threaten to create or strengthen a dominant
     position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the
     EEA or in any substantial part thereof.
      Relevant geographic markets
20. The Commission has in previous cases found that the market for M&A advisory
     services has a national dimension8. This is due to a number of factors, such as the need
     for detailed knowledge of local corporate law and business structures, accounting rules,
     regulatory regimes and market prices. In practice the Commission has found that
     provision of M&A services generally requires that the principal advisor be physically
     established in the country where the target company is situated9.
5 See IV/M.1172 Fortis AG/Generale Bank; IV/M.1910 – MeritaNordbanken/Unidanmark; Comp/M.2158 –
Credit Suisse Group/Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.
6 Comp/M.1856 – Citigroup/Schroders, para 10.
7 See Comp/M.2158 – Credit Suisse Group/Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette para. 7.
8 See Comp/M.2158 – Credit Suisse Group/Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette para. 10; Comp/M.1856 –
Citigroup/Schroders, para 13.
9 Case N° IV/ M. 508 BHF/CCF (II).
                                                     5

21. For the purpose of the present case it is not necessary to define conclusively the relevant
    geographic market because, even on the basis of the narrowest market definition, the
    concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which
    effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or in any substantial
    part of that area.
22. As regards IPO advisory services the notifying parties affirm that the Commission has
    taken the view in a previous case that the relevant market is EU-wide or world-wide10.
    However in view of the fact that in that case the market definition was left open a
    narrower dimension of the market can not be excluded. In any event for the purpose of
    the present case a definitive delimitation of the relevant geographic market is not
    necessary, since a dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the
    basis of the narrowest geographic market definition.
VI. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
Horizontal effects
23. Since market shares in this sector are difficult to determine “league tables” may give an
    indication of relative market position and performance. The Commission has used
    leagues tables in previous cases11.
24. The parties submit that Lazard is far from being dominant on the market for M&A
    advisory services either at national or EU level. In M&A advice Lazard’s market shares
    have remained on average below 30 % in Italy and below 20 % at EU level, whereas
    Intesa’s presence on this market in Italy can be considered de minimis (below 3%) and
    almost non-existent at EEA level. As regards ranking, of completed transactions in Italy,
    Lazard was ranked number one in 2001 but number ten in 2000 and number six in 1999.
    As regards completed transactions in the EU, Lazard ranked 5th, 10th and 6th in 2001,
    2000 and 1999, respectively. Intesa for its part was not [in a prominent position] in
    2001.
25. As regards IPO advisory services, at EU level, Lazard's share of this market is not
    significant (on average less than 5 % in the last 3 years) and Intesa is hardly present on
    this market. In Italy neither party has a significant presence.
26. Furthermore there is also a large number of strong competitors established in Italy such
    as Morgan Stanley, Mediobanca, Lehman Brothers, JP Morgan, Merill Lynch, Goldman
    Sachs, who are active in this sector and who can provide substantial competition to the
    joint venture.
27. Finally as the Commission noted in the Credit Suisse Decision "markets for M&A
    advisory services are competitive. Both services are generally provided on a project-by-
    project basis, and consequently, for a new project, a customer can switch supplier at no
    cost and is not in any way bound by his choice in previous projects. In addition,
    customers for M&A advisory services frequently use more than one advisor or even no
10See Comp/M.2158 – Credit Suisse Group/Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette para. 9;
11 See Comp/M.2158 – Credit Suisse Group/Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette para. 12.
                                                     6

    advisor at all"12. Consequently although, in a given year, a bank can achieve a high
    ranking and a correspondingly high market share, this may not necessarily reflect
    consistent market power over a period of time. In any event as the transaction represents
    an insignificant increase in concentration levels it does not give rise to any risk of
    creation or strengthening of dominance within the EEA or a substantial part thereof.
 Co-ordination effects - Art. 2 (4)
28. The parties claim that they will not retain to a significant extent activities in the same
    market as the joint venture or in a market which is downstream or upstream from that of
    the joint venture or in any neighbouring market. A preliminary analysis indicates that
    there is little risk of co-ordination between the JV and the parties. Intesa's presence
    outside Italy is de minimis, and Lazard's presence within Italy outside the JV is non-
    existent.
VII. CONCLUSION
29. For the above reasons the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC)
    No 4064/89.
                                                          For the Commission
                                                          Signed by Mario MONTI
                                                          Member of the Commission
12 See Comp/M.2158 – Credit Suisse Group/Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette para. 16.
                                                     7
