                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                      Brussels, 09/12/2002
                                                                      SG (2002) D/233055
  In the published version of this decision, some                           PUBLIC VERSION
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                        MERGER PROCEDURE
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
                                                                         ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.
                                                                     To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:            Case No COMP/M.3014 - Logica / CMG
                    Notification of 07 November 2002 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No
                    4064/891.
     1. On 7 November 2002, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
          concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 (Merger
          Regulation) by which the undertaking Logica plc (‘Logica’) acquires, within the meaning
          of Article 3(1) (b) of the Merger Regulation, control of CMG plc (‘CMG’).
     2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
          operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
          raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA
          Agreement.
I. THE PARTIES TO THE OPERATION
     3. Logica is a UK-based information and communications technology (ICT) services
          company, providing ICT consultancy, systems integration, products, services and support
          on a world-wide scale to a variety of business sectors.
1    OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
     Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

    4. CMG is an Anglo/Dutch ICT services company, serving customers in a variety of
        business sectors with solutions through telecommunication products, consultancy,
        business services and systems developments on a world-wide scale.
II. THE OPERATION
Concentration
    5. The transaction is the acquisition of CMG by Logica which will be effected by way of a
        scheme of arrangement under section 425 of the UK Companies Act. Under this scheme,
        Logica will issue new LogicaCMG shares to CMG shareholders and their existing CMG
        shares will be cancelled. Post transaction, Logica will hold the entire issued share capital of
        CMG thereby creating a combined group which will incorporate the whole of both parties'
        respective businesses. Logica and CMG shareholders will hold respectively 60% and 40%
        of the new group, to be named LogicaCMG plc. The proposed transaction therefore
        constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
Community dimension
    6. The combined worldwide turnover of all undertakings concerned is well in excess of
        EUR 2,500 million in 2001. The combined aggregate turnover of Logica and CMG
        exceeded EUR 100 million in the UK, the Netherlands, France and Germany. In addition,
        the aggregate turnover of each of Logica and CMG exceeded EUR 25 million in the UK,
        the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany and France in 2001. The aggregate Community-wide
        turnover of Logica and CMG respectively exceeded EUR 100 milion. Finally, the
        undertakings concerned did not achieve more than two-thirds of their EU turnover within
        one and the same member state. On the basis of the turnover figures of the parties, it can
        be concluded that the concentration has a Community dimension pursuant to the Article
        1(3) of the Merger Regulation.
III. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
    7. Both Logica and CMG provide a wide array of IT Services and are strong players for
        Mobile Messaging services.
     A. IT Services
        Relevant Product Market
    8. The Commission has recently reviewed the IT Services markets2 and has considered that
        the market for IT services can be sub-divided into the following seven segments: IT
        management services, business management services, software development and
        integration, IT and business consulting, software maintenance and support, hardware
        maintenance and education and training. In contrast, the parties take the view that
        competition in the IT services market is most properly analysed across the market as a
        whole, as most of the top players in the global IT services market are active in all
        segments described above. In addition to the above, the IT services market can also be
        delineated on a sectoral basis according to the activities of customers. As such, separate
        industry sectors for communications, education, energy and utilities, financial services,
2   Case COMP M.2946 IBM/PwC consulting
                                                      2

      government, healthcare, manufacturing, retail, services and transportation could be
      distinguished. In the light of this transaction, the exact definition of the relevant market
      can be left open, since on any alternative product market definition, the concentration
      does not raise competition concerns.
      Relevant geographic market
  9. The parties submit that the market is EEA-wide, if not global, in scope. In previous
      decisions3, the Commission concluded that, despite a strong trend towards
      internationalisation of supply and demand, the geographic scope of the IT services
      market has not yet become wider than national. In any case, with regard to the present
      transaction, the exact geographical scope of the IT services market(s) can be left open,
      since on any alternative geographic market definition, the concentration does not raise
      competition concerns.
      Competition effects
  10. Regardless of which of the above described product market definitions is retained, the
      concentration does not lead to affected markets for IT services. No matter what approach
      is taken to segment IT services, the parties’ combined market shares4 do not exceed 15%
      either globally, in the EEA or on a Member State level5. Even combined, the new entity
      would not enter the top five league of major IT services providers, which consists of
      IBM, EDS, HP, Accenture and Cap Gemini. Accordingly, it appears that the transaction
      will not give rise to competition concerns on the markets for IT services.
    B. Mobile Messaging Services
      Relevant Product Market
  11. Both Logica and CMG have developed a strong expertise with regard to mobile
      messaging services. The Parties provide Telecommunication companies (Telcos) with the
      necessary hardware, software and necessary services to implement and maintain a mobile
      messaging solution. The supported mobile messaging applications are then developed by
      third parties and content providers. The parties do not view the business segment of
      mobile messaging services as a market in itself, rather considering this as a small sub-set
      of activity within IT Services relating to the communications sector.
  12. Mobile messaging relates to the transfer of data between mobile telephones (and in
      future, between a mobile telephone and other communication devices). On the basis of
      the underlying technology, a distinction can be made between short messaging service
3 Case COMP M.2946 IBM/PwC consulting
4 Source : Gartner 2001
5 With the exception of the ‘development & integration’ and ‘IT and business consulting’ markets in Ireland,
  where the combined entity would hold market shares between 15% and 30%. However, as CMG currently has
  no presence in Ireland, the combined market share is entirely attributable to Logica and is not incremented by
  the Merger.
                                                         3

      (‘SMS’) on the one hand and multimedia messaging services (‘MMS’) on the other
      hand6.
  13. SMS data messaging emerged in the early to mid 1990’s, enabling mobile users to send
      non formatted text-based messages via their mobile handsets. SMS usage developed
      slowly, but unexpectedly became an extremely popular service in the late 1990’s, as a
      cheaper way to communicate and as an alternative to email. As a result, SMS usage
      spiralled upwards, at a disproportionately higher rate than the increase in the mobile
      phone subscriber base.
  14. MMS represents the “new generation” of messaging capability, as it enables users to send
      and receive messages containing high-resolution data such as formatted text,
      photographs, images and sounds. MMS and future third generation mobile services will
      enable interaction through e-mail and instant messaging using high speed internet
      transmission technology.
  15. The market investigation has clearly indicated that the provisioning of mobile messaging
      services is a distinct market, separate from overall IT Services relating to the
      communications sector. Indeed, mobile messaging service providers have specific
      expertise and are selected on the basis of past performance and track record. With regard
      to the question whether SMS based messaging services form a separate market from
      MMS based messaging services, a distinction needs to be made between the Telco who
      implements the technology and the end-user who seeks the most appropriate solution for
      his communication needs. From the point of view of the latter, MMS is a promising but
      nascent technology that is not yet sufficiently widely available to form a distinct market.
      From the point of view of the Telco, MMS can be considered as the next important step
      in the development of the telecom markets, although the rate at which end-users will
      adopt MMS is uncertain. Despite the potential importance of MMS, Telcos do not
      consider that this technology will substitute SMS in the short to medium term. Rather, it
      can be expected that SMS and MMS will exist in parallel over the next 5 years.
  16. The market investigation has indicated that the importance of demand substitutability
      would not support a further segmentation into SMS and MMS mobile messaging
      services. Indeed, Telcos without existing SMS-C infrastructure could purchase mobile
      messaging platforms that are capable of supporting both SMS and MMS traffic. Such
      will be even more the case when Telcos invest in GPRS/3G/UMTS networks that will be
      capable of handling SMS, MMS and instant messaging within one platform.
  17. In any case, due to the limited impact of MMS on the market for the provisioning of
      Mobile messaging services, the question whether MMS forms a market in itself can be
      left open, since on any alternative product market definition, the concentration does not
      raise competition concerns.
  18. The parties have submitted that competition in the SMS segment reflects demand-side
      substitutability as Telcos can meet their remaining capacity demands with buying SMS
      specific router technology rather than additional SMS systems. The market investigation
      has confirmed this to a certain extent. Although routers cannot substitute the need for
      SMS infrastructure in itself, the use of routers optimises the working of existing SMS
6 Enhanced Messaging Service (EMS), is an intermediate step between SMS and the more technologically
  advanced MMS. EMS enables end-users to send multimedia richer messages whilst Telcos can provide this
  communication through standard SMS-C infrastructure. The Market Investigation has indicated that EMS is
  almost not in use in Europe.
                                                     4

      infrastructure as it allows the existing capacity to be used up to its maximum. Routers are
      particularly effective in applications where the store/forward features of SMS
      infrastructure are not required (such as voting applications). Precisely these applications
      are expected to be important for the remaining growth of SMS. As the market
      investigation has confirmed that almost all future SMS mobile messaging competitions
      will be for the increase of current capacity, routers already provide customers with
      demand substitutability for additional SMS.
      Relevant geographical Market
  19. The parties submit that the relevant geographical scope of the market ought to be
      considered as global in scope or at least as EEA-wide. The market investigation has
      confirmed this and has not pointed to market characteristics that would allow to consider
      the market as national in scope. Currently, almost all important suppliers for mobile
      messaging services are located in the EEA. However, as US suppliers increasingly adopt
      European GSM standards, it is not to be excluded that they could increasingly compete
      for future competitions outside the US. In any case, with regard to the present transaction,
      the exact geographical scope of the mobile messaging services market(s) can be left
      open, since on any alternative geographic market definition, the concentration does not
      raise competition concerns.
  B. Market Positions
  20. Both CMG and Logica hold leading positions in the EEA7 for SMS mobile messaging
      services with a combined market share of around [75%-80%] (CMG [60%-65%] and
      Logica [15%-20%]), facing limited competitive pressure from Nokia ([10%-15%]),
      Schlumberger/SEMA ([5%-10%]) and Comverse ([0%-5%]). The parties submit that
      such high market shares can however not be considered as a proxy for market power in
      the mobile messaging services market. Indeed, the parties suggest that the relevance of
      SMS is rapidly fading, as it is to be replaced by multimedia enhanced MMS and that
      remaining competitions for SMS infrastructure and related services are becoming scarce.
  21. The market investigation has not fully confirmed this. Telcos are investing heavily in 3G
      infrastructure and MMS but have rejected that this will have immediate important
      substitution effects on the current levels of SMS traffic. From the point of view of the
      end-user, MMS currently complements, rather than substitutes SMS. It can however not
      be ignored that penetration of SMS amongst end-users in Western Europe is now
      reaching its saturation point, with an estimated 75% of mobile phone uses regularly using
      the service. Whilst it is anticipated that the consumer use of SMS will continue to
      increase slightly in the short term, it is expected to peak in 2003, before stabilising or
      declining. MMS traffic is expected to grow exponentially after 2003 reaching critical
      mass whilst also the expected convergence between mobile phones and portable
      computers could have a lasting effect on SMS traffic.
  22. Although SMS mobile messaging services will remain important, the parties’ argument
      that competition for this segment has had its course has been confirmed by the market
      investigation. Telecommunications companies have invested heavily in SMS
      infrastructure prior to 2001 and have built up sufficient capacity the meet their SMS
      traffic forecast for the years to come. In part, the level of built up idle capacity is due to
7 Market shares on the basis of a world-wide market definition are less important on all occasions
                                                          5

      external factors (such as the forecasted traffic growth for the millennium) and internal
      factors (Telcos have incentivised customers to use SMS away from peak moments and
      are using capacity more efficiently). The parties have illustrated the abrupt stop of Telcos
      investing in SMS by […] and the reduction of mobile messaging services prices ([…])
      over the past two years. Telcos have confirmed that their investment plans for additional
      SMS capacity are minimal and that the pressure on prices will continue. An analysis of
      the SMS capacities available to Telcos above peak load traffic indicates that there is
      sufficient capacity to cover future SMS traffic, even if the transition from SMS to MMS
      based messaging would take longer than expected by industry analysts.
  23. Even for the limited SMS competition opportunities remaining, the parties combined
      high market share would not allow them to act independently by raising prices or
      reducing quality. As most remaining investments target additional capacity, the parties
      face competitive pressure from companies offering routers, for which they have no
      market presence, as routers can be effectively implemented to increase SMS system
      capacity. As for new SMS-C installations, it can be expected that these competition
      opportunities will be rare as Telcos would rather invest in combined SMS/MMS
      infrastructure. In addition, alternative suppliers such as Nokia, Ericsson and SEMA
      remain viable and can continue to counteract a stronger Logica CMG.
  24. Once a Telco has selected a mobile messaging supplier, there is limited possibility to
      change the incumbent supplier within a short period of time as switching costs are high
      and generally not economically justifiable. However, as customers are locked in with
      their present supplier, the merger will merely increase the combined entity’s market share
      without having an impact on its ability to act independently. As confirmed by the market
      investigation, the provisioning of SMS mobile messaging services are subject to […].
      The market investigation has also pointed to the maturity of the SMS segment. All Telcos
      have selected their SMS suppliers and instances where CMG and Logica could still
      compete against each other have become scarce. Consequently, neither Telcos nor other
      third parties have raised significant objections with regard to the combination of the
      parties’ SMS activities.
  25. As to the parties’ incentive to act independently, it is to be emphasised that the new entity
      will need to compete for future MMS mobile messaging services contracts and that
      Telcos could effectively retaliate any observed independent behaviour of the combined
      entity for SMS. As illustrated by the parties’ limited number of wins in MMS bidding
      competitions8, they have not been able to extend their leading positions for SMS to the
      technologically more advanced MMS and face strong competition from suppliers such as
      Nokia and Ericsson (who hold technologically leading positions and have an inherent
      advantage as handset and network equipment providers) and players that have no
      presence for SMS mobile messaging services. Telcos have indicated that the combination
      of the parties’ MMS activities would result in a more competitive entity with regard to
      MMS.
  26. Accordingly, it appears that the transaction will not give rise to competition concerns on
      the markets for mobile messaging services, regardless of whether such analysis is made
      for the market as a whole or for SMS and MMS individually.
8 Market shares on the basis of MMS competitions indicates that Ericsson is the clear leader with around [50%-
  60%], followed by Nokia with [20%-25%] and CMG with [15%-20%]. Logica accounts for [0%-5%] of the
  market.
                                                       6

IV.     CONCLUSION
    27. In light of the above, the Commission has concluded that the proposed transaction is not
        likely to create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
        competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
        area.
    28. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
        and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
        decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No
        4064/89.
                                                     For the Commission
                                                     (signed)
                                                     Mario MONTI
                                                     Member of the Commission
                                                  7
