                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 28/02/2003
                                                                 SG (2003) D/228811-12
  In the published version of this decision,                             PUBLIC VERSION
  some information has been omitted
  pursuant to Article 17(2) of Council
  Regulation       (EEC)      No       4064/89
  concerning non-disclosure of business                               MERGER PROCEDURE
  secrets      and      other     confidential                     ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
  information. The omissions are shown
  thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of
  figures or a general description.
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.3035 – Berkshire Hathaway/Converium/Gaum JV
               Notification of 29.01.2003 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
               No 4064/891
1.    On 29.01.03, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
      pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 by which Northern
      States Agency, Inc (“Northern States”, USA) belonging to the Berkshire Hathaway
      group (“Berkshire Hathaway”, USA) and Converium AG (“Converium”, Switzerland)
      acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation joint control of
      Global Aerospace Underwriting Managers Limited (“GAUM”, UK) by way of
      purchase of shares.
2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
      operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
      doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA agreement.
1     OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
      Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

I.   THE PARTIES
3.   Northern States is a subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway, a US-based holding company
     with subsidiaries engaged in a number of diverse business activities, the most
     important of which are property and casualty insurance.
4.   Converium is primarily active in the provision of insurance and reinsurance for all
     major lines of non life insurance.
5.   GAUM is a supplier of underwriting and management services to insurance and
     reinsurance companies. Its main client is the Global Pool but it also serves third
     parties, which are active mainly in the aerospace risk sector.
6.   The Global Pool is a provider of aviation risk insurance. It consists of several
     insurance companies (the “Members”). Each Member has a certain level of
     participation in the Pool, which corresponds to the percentage of liability he will
     assume among the totality of liabilities covered by the Pool. The Members and their
     participation in the Global Pool may change from year to year. As regards the level of
     participation, it should be noted that since 01.01.2003, Berkshire Hathaway and
     Converium are members of the Global Pool with a participation of 25% each whereas
     CGU International Insurance PLC (“Aviva”) has completely withdrawn and Royal &
     Sun Alliance Insurance PLC (“RSA”) has reduced its participation from 28.12 % to
     9.25%.
II.  THE OPERATION
7.   The share capital of GAUM is presently held equally by Aviva and RSA (together the
     “Sellers”). According to a Share Purchase Agreement concluded on 27.11.2002
     between the Sellers and each of Northern States, Converium and Münchener
     Rückversicherungs-Gesellschaft Aktiengesellschaft (“Munich Re”) (together the
     “Buyers”), Northern States, Converium and Munich Re will all acquire shareholdings
     in GAUM of 40%, 25% and 24.9% respectively. RSA will retain a shareholding of
     10.1%.
III. CONCENTRATION
Joint control
8.   According to a Shareholders’ Agreement [between] Northern States, Converium,
     Munich Re, RSA and GAUM, strategic business decisions concerning GAUM
     including […], are to be passed by a majority of […]. […] Converium and Northern
     States […] will each have the ability to veto these strategic decisions. […] neither RSA
     nor Munich Re is able to block votes on any strategic decisions. There is no common
     interest between RSA and Munich Re pursuant to which these parties, or any other
     combination of parties, will always vote together on strategic decisions. In particular,
     the Shareholders' agreement […]. Therefore, Northern States and Converium will
     exercise joint control over GAUM.
Full-function
9.   GAUM has, and will continue to have, a management dedicated to its day-to-day
     operations. The individuals comprising the management are specialists who are not
                                                  2

     seconded from the parents. GAUM has access to all other necessary resources including
     finance, staff and assets. It is intended to operate on a lasting basis.
10. GAUM operates in the market for the provision of underwriting and management
     services to insurers and reinsurers, including pools, and is therefore acting on behalf of
     a principal. More specifically, GAUM is in charge of “writing” insurance or
     reinsurance cover within specified classes of risks, that is to say sell (re)insurance
     cover from his principal (the insurance or reinsurance company or a pool) for that type
     of risk, and to set the price of the policy (“the premiums”). An underwriter therefore
     needs to have expertise in risk assessment. Management services consists mainly in
     handling the formalities for the conclusion of policies, the administration of claims,
     and the provision of services to pools or companies that are in “run off”, that is to say
     that do not write new business but whose insurance policies have not yet all expired.
11. GAUM does not purchase insurance from its parent companies (nor from the members
     of the Global Pool), but writes business on behalf of the members of the Global Pool.
     In addition, GAUM provides management services to insurers and reinsurers,
     including other pools. For instance, it performs “run-off” services on behalf of
     previous members of the Global Pool and third parties. For 2003, the business plan of
     GAUM intends to achieve […]% of its turnover with its parent companies, […]% with
     the other members of the Global Pool and […]% with third parties. This calculation is
     made on the basis of the participation of each Member in the Global Pool for 2003.
12. On the basis of the above, GAUM meets the criteria of a jointly controlled full-
     function joint venture, intended to operate on a lasting basis. Therefore, the notified
     operation is a concentration within the meaning of article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
     Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
13. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 billion2 (Berkshire 42,040 million, Converium 3,215 million, Gaum 89.9
     million). Two of them have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million
     (Berkshire […] million, Converium […] million), but they do not achieve more than
     two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same
     Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V. RELEVANT MARKETS
14. The parties have activities in three areas :
     -           provision of underwriting and management services to insurers/reinsurers;
     -           insurance;
     -           reinsurance.
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Notice on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include
    turnover for the period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates
    and translated into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                         3

Underwriting and management services to insurers/reinsurers
Relevant product market
15. GAUM provides services for the members of the Global Pool and third parties in
    relation to insurance and reinsurance. These services include: 1) the underwriting of
    insurance/reinsurance risks; and 2) the management of policies on behalf of
    insurers/reinsurers and their pools.
16. The parties are of the opinion that underwriting and managing services represent a
    market distinct from the provision of insurance or reinsurance, although many insurance
    and reinsurance companies do not resort to external suppliers of these services.The
    Commission’s investigation has confirmed this point. In particular, many respondents
    have explained that many pools of insurers or reinsurers resort to external suppliers
    since the members of these pools do not want to rely on the expertise of one of them.
17. According to the parties the provision of underwriting and management services
    constitutes one single product market regardless of whether they are provided to
    insurance or reinsurance companies. This is because the assessment of risk does not
    differ from an insurer's or reinsurer's point of view. This point has been confirmed by
    the Commission’s investigation. No respondent has claimed that underwriting and
    management services differ depending on whether they are provided to insurers or
    reinsurers.
18. The parties also submit that the provision of underwriting services and the provision of
    management services to insurers/reinsurers constitute one single product market
    because these services are strongly complementary from both suppliers’ and
    customers’ point of view. In addition the parties argue that all suppliers could offer
    both categories of services and that customers are always seeking suppliers that can
    deliver the two categories of services. The Commission’s investigation has largely
    confirmed the view of the parties in this respect. In particular, many respondents have
    indicated that underwriting and management services are usually supplied as part of
    the same package.
19. On the basis of the above, it can be concluded that there is a separate product market
    for the underwriting and management services to insurers and reinsurers.
20. Having decided this, it has to be verified whether this market needs to be further
    subdivided on the basis of the kind of risks for which the services are provided. The
    parties are of the opinion that the relevant product market encompasses the provision
    of management and underwriting services in respect of all types of risks and not just
    the provision of these services to aviation risk (re)insurers. According to the parties,
    there is a high level of supply-side substitutability between providing management and
    agency services for different types of risks. It can nevertheless be argued that
    aerospace insurance has specific characteristics due to the particular nature and size of
    the risks it covers and that therefore the provision of underwriting and management
    services in this field requires specific expertise and skills.
21. However, for the purpose of this case, the question whether within the market for the
    provision of underwriting and management services there is a distinct product market
    for the provision of such services to the (re)insurers active in the aerospace field can be
                                                   4

     left open since the proposed transaction does not raise any competition concerns even
     on this narrower product market definition.
Relevant geographic market
22. The parties consider that the relevant geographic market for the provision of
     underwriting and management services to insurers/reinsurers is worldwide. Competing
     suppliers include undertakings established in Europe, Asia and in the US and
     (re)insurance companies from across the globe seek out managers possessing the
     appropriate expertise and skills. The market investigation has confirmed the views of
     the parties concerning the relevant geographic market.
23. On the basis of the above, it seems that the market for underwriting and management
     services is at least EEA-wide and probably worldwide. However, for the purpose of
     this case, there is no need to exactly determine whether the relevant geographic market
     is EEA-wide or worldwide, because the proposed transaction does not raise any
     competitive concerns for each of these two geographic markets.
Insurance
Relevant product market
24. Both Berkshire and Converium provide non life insurance. They are not active in life
     insurance. The operation concerns more specifically the provision of aerospace
     insurance.
25. In a number of previous decisions3, the Commission has indicated that insurance and
     reinsurance are considered to belong to different product markets. In past decisions, the
     Commission has also stated that in the insurance sector a distinction is to be made
     between life and non life insurance4. In addition, the Commission has also held that
     non life insurance from the demand side could be divided into as many product
     markets as there are different kinds of risks covered, such as aerospace, marine,
     commercial & real estate, etc, since their characteristics, premiums and purposes are
     distinct and there is typically no substitutability for the consumer for the risk insured.
     However, the Commission has also found that, from a supply side perspective, the
     conditions for insurance of different risk types are quite similar and most large
     insurance companies are active in several risk types. This suggests that many different
     types of non life insurance should be included in the same product market5.
26. The parties submit that although there exist different types of risks, the relevant
     product market is that for insurance as a whole since any insurer could easily switch
     market insurance coverage for one type of risk to another. The Commission’s
     investigation however has indicated that the life and non life insurance have different
     characteristics and are probably separate markets. In addition, the Commission’s
3   See inter alia case IV/M.1306 – Berkshire Hathaway/General Re
4   See inter alia case IV/M.1172 – Fortis AG/Generale Bank
5   See inter alia case IV/M.2676 - Sampo/Varma Sampo/IF Holding/JV
                                                       5

     investigation has revealed that the aerospace insurance has specific features due to the
     particular nature and size of the risks it covers, so that it could be regarded as a distinct
     product market within the broader insurance sector.
27. The aerospace insurance sector itself could possibly be further subdivided into a
     number of separate markets comprising each of a particular type of risk, such as
     airline, products/airports, General Aviation, hull, war/terrorism, satellite/space, etc.
     From the demand side there is clearly no substitution for the insured between the
     different categories of policy offered. However, the respondents to the Commission’s
     investigation have clearly indicated that there exists within the broad category
     “aerospace risks” a high supply side substitutability.
28. However, for the purpose of this case, it is not necessary to exactly define the relevant
     product market since whatever market definition is considered the transaction does not
     raise any competition concerns.
Relevant geographic market
29. Although the Commission has previously acknowledged that the markets for insurance
     are national in scope, it has not excluded that the markets for the insurance of large
     commercial risks could be wider than national6.
30. The parties submit that the provision of aerospace insurance is to be regarded as
     covering “large risks”. Although general aviation may be characterised as a
     comparatively “small risk”, the parties submit that competition to provide this cover is
     also contested on an international basis.
31. The parties therefore state that the markets for aerospace insurance is at least
     Community-wide. For example, major airlines have hull insurance covering that risk
     up to the limit of 250 million US dollars for a large commercial aircraft such as a
     Boeing 747. The parties also state that there are no national distribution channels for
     these products since they are mainly sold via brokers which are established on a
     worldwide basis and that fiscal/regulatory constraints are not trade barriers. The
     Commission’s investigation has confirmed that the market for the provision of
     aerospace insurance is at least European-wide and may even be worldwide.
32. Based on the above, it can be concluded that the market for the provision of aerospace
     risk insurance is at least EEA-wide.
Reinsurance
Relevant product market
33. In previous decisions, the Commission has suggested that the reinsurance sector
     market could be subdivided into two markets: life and non life7.
6   See inter alia case IV/M.2676 - Sampo/Varmo Sampo/IF Holding/ JV
7   See inter alia case IV/M.1306 – Berkshire Hathaway/General Re
                                                      6

34. The parties submit that while some reinsurers may specialise in particular types of
     covers, the relevant product market is that of the supply of reinsurance as a whole since
     any reinsurer could readily and swiftly offer reinsurance coverage for any type of risks.
     The Commission’s investigation has largely confirmed this view. In particular, many
     respondents have explained that the barriers to enter a new risk are quite low since (a)
     the approval which is rarely required to offer reinsurance cover for a new type of risk
     is easy to obtain, (b) no specific additional distribution channels are needed since
     reinsurance cover for a new type of risk could always be sold via brokers, and (c) the
     relevant expertise required to offer reinsurance cover for a new type of risk could be
     acquired by recruitment relatively easily and rapidly. Nevertheless, due to the
     particular nature and size of aerospace risk, it could be argued that reinsurance of such
     risk may be regarded as a distinct product market within the broader (non life)
     reinsurance sector.
35. However, for the purpose of this case, it is not necessary to exactly define the relevant
     product market since whatever market definition is considered the transaction does not
     raise any no competition concerns.
Relevant geographic market
36. The parties submit that the market for the provision of reinsurance is worldwide mainly
     because of the very nature of this activity which requires to pool risks on an
     international basis and this was confirmed by the market investigation. This is in line
     with previous Commission’s decisions8.
37. On the basis of the above, it can be concluded that the market for the provision of
     reinsurance is worldwide.
VI. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
Provision of underwriting and management services to insurers/reinsurers
38. The only market where GAUM and its two parent companies are active is the market
     for the provision of underwriting and management services. Indeed, Berkshire controls
     both USAU (which manages the USAIG Pool) and Faraday (which is the managing
     agent of a Lloyd’s Syndicate). Converium controls Satec, which manages the Italian-
     based Satec Pool which is a provider of satellite/space insurance.
39. If the relevant product market were to be defined as that of underwriting and
     management services to insurers and reinsurers regardless of the type of risk , the
     parties estimate that their worldwide market shares are less than 1% for each of them.
     At the EEA level, the parties indicate that their market shares are less than […]%
     (GAUM), less than […]% (Faraday), less than […]% (Satec), resulting in a combined
     market share below [20]%. USAU is not active in the EEA.
40. If the relevant product market is to be limited only to the provision of services for
     aerospace risk (re)insurance, the parties estimate their worldwide market shares at
     […]% (GAUM), […]% (USAU), approximately […]% (Faraday) and below […]%
     (Satec), resulting in a worldwide combined market share [of less than 20]%. At the
8   See inter alia case IV/M.1306 – Berkshire Hathaway/General Re
                                                      7

     EEA level, the parties indicate that their market shares are less than […]% (GAUM),
     and less than […]% (Satec and Faraday), resulting in a EEA combined market share
     [of less than 10]%.
41. If the relevant product market is defined even more narrowly as that of underwriting
     and management services provided by external suppliers (disregarding self-supply of
     underwriting and management services) in the aerospace (re)insurance field, the parties
     estimate their respective worldwide market shares in the range of […]% (GAUM),
     […]% (USAU) and […]% (Satec), resulting in a worldwide combined market share of
     approximately [less than 45]%. Since Faraday is not an external supplier of services to
     the Lloyd’s syndicate that it manages, it is not a competitor in this market. The parties
     indicate that their respective market share in the EEA are not materially different from
     those on a worldwide basis.
42. Other important competitors such as Allianz (which manages the Deutsche Luftpool),
     La Réunion Aérienne (“LRA”), Nordic Aviation Insurance Group, Swiss Pool and
     Japanese Aviation Insurance Pool are active in the same market.
43. The parties argue that, the concentration will not create a dominant position in the
     market for the provision of underwriting and management services, because an external
     provider of such services could not exercise market power against the interest of the
     (re)insurers to which it provides its services or against the purchaser of the insurance or
     reinsurance cover. Insurers and reinsurers, which are large and sophisticated
     companies, exercise significant countervailing buyer power. Furthermore, the
     possibility for (re)insurers to start self-supplying underwriting and claims management
     exerts a significant constraint on providers of such services. All these points have been
     largely confirmed by the respondents to the Commission’s investigation.
44. It has also been stated by the parties that many companies that presently write aviation
     risk insurance could enter the market for the provision of underwriting and
     management services without great difficulty and within a limited period of time. The
     parties estimate that an undertaking that currently only provides management and
     underwriting services to itself could begin to supply these services to third parties in
     less than a year. The Commission’s investigation has confirmed this point.
Insurance
45. As neither Berkshire nor Converium is active in the provision of life insurance, there is
     therefore no aggregation of market share in the provision of life insurance in any
     geographic market.
46. The market share of both Berkshire and Converium on the world and EEA non life
     segment of the insurance sector is [below 15]% for each of them. When considered at a
     national level and/or for each type of risks, the combined market share of the parties
     remains well below 15%.
47. Concerning the aerospace risk insurance, Berkshire Hathaway and Converium indicate
     that their market shares are [less than 10]% and [less than 10]% respectively The
     parties also indicate that the aerospace risk insurance business which GAUM writes in
     the name of the Global Pool members represents a worldwide market share of [less
     than 10]%.
                                                    8

48. At the EEA level, the parties estimate that their combined market share is lower than
    [10]% (GAUM: less than […]%, Berkshire Hathaway/Faraday: less than […]%,
    Converium/Satec less than […]%). USAIG […] and its share of the EEA market for
    the provision of aerospace insurance is de minimis. If the aerospace insurance market
    were to be further subdivided on the basis of the different types of risks, the aggregated
    market share of the parties would [be less than 30]% in the EEA (with the exception of
    the satellite/space segment where their combined market share could reach 30%) and
    [less than 40]% at a worldwide level (with the exception of the satellite/space segment
    where their combined market share could reach 40%).
49. However, the parties submit that the other suppliers of aerospace risk insurance such as
    Ace, AIG, Allianz and LRA have similar shares to the Global Pool, that is to say [less
    than 10%] worldwide or in the EEA. The parties also explain that there are
    approximately 40 insurers worldwide that are active in the provision of aerospace risk
    insurance. The Commission’s investigation has confirmed the existence of other
    important suppliers (pools and individual companies) of aerospace risk insurance.
50. In addition, on the demand side, three large international brokers are responsible for
    arranging about three quarters of the aerospace business written worldwide which may
    give them substantial countervailing buying power which could potentially benefit
    their clients, the end-customers.
51. Furthermore, the parties state that the market for the provision of aerospace insurance
    is characterised by over-capacity (for almost all classes of aerospace insurance risks)
    and that this overcapacity has the effect of increasing competition and lowering prices
    to the end customers’ benefit as brokers are able to play one insurer off against another
    to obtain cover at the best terms and price for the customer. In general, the market
    investigation has confirmed this view.
Reinsurance
52. A further vertical relationship exists between the market in which GAUM operates and
    the market for the provision of reinsurance in which each of Berkshire and Converium
    operate.
53. The parties estimate that Converium and Berkshire have a worldwide reinsurance
    market share (2001) of […]% and […]% respectively, resulting in a combined market
    share of [less than 20]%. Furthermore, the parties state that the reinsurance market is
    highly fragmented and that a large number of strong competitors are active in the
    market, such as Munich Re ([less than 20]%) and Swiss Re ([less than 20]%)9. The
    respondents to the Commission’s investigation have largely confirmed the parties’
    estimates.
54. If the reinsurance market were to be segmented into life and non life reinsurance, the
    parties estimate that Converium and Berkshire Hathaway would have a worldwide
    market share of less than […]% and less than […]% respectively, resulting in a
    combined market share of less than 15% in each of these segments. On a hypothetical
    market for the provision of aerospace risk reinsurance, the parties indicate that the
    worldwide market share of Berkshire Hathaway is [less than 10]% and that of
9  Estimates of the parties based on publicly available information.
                                                          9

     Converium [less than 10%]. The parties also indicate that the reinsurance business
     which GAUM writes in the name of the Global Pool members is approximately […]
     million US dollars representing a negligible market share whatever product market
     definition is retained.
55. Consequently, the parties would not be able to use their position in the (aerospace)
     reinsurance market to foreclose or otherwise hinder competition in the (aerospace)
     insurance market.
General conclusion
56. On the basis of the above-mentioned position of the parties in the relevant markets and
     the fact that they will continue to face several strong competitors, it can be concluded
     that the transaction does not raise any competition concerns.
57. In light of the above, the Commission has concluded that he proposed transaction is not
     likely to create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
     competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
     area.
VII. CONCLUSION
58. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
     Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                       For the Commission
                                                       (Signed)
                                                       Mario MONTI
                                                       Member of the Commission
                                                 10
