                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 01.08.2003
                                                                 SG (2003) D/231149
  In the published version of this decision, some
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article                       PUBLIC VERSION
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                 MERGER PROCEDURE
  general description.                                             ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                     To the notifying parties
Dear Sir, Madam
Subject:           Case No. COMP/M.3141 – CEMENTBOUW / ENCI / joint venture
                   Notification of 1 July 2003 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No
                   4064/891.
1. On 01/07/2003 the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
     pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 (Merger Regulation) by
     which the Dutch undertakings Cementbouw Betonmortel B.V. ("Cementbouw") and
     ENCI Holding N.V. ("ENCI"), acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the
     Council Regulation joint control of a newly created company constituting a joint venture
     by way of purchase of shares.
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
     operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does not
     raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA
     Agreement.
I. THE PARTIES
3. Cementbouw and ENCI produce and trade building materials such as ready-mixed
     concrete, mortar, aggregates and related construction products. ENCI is ultimately
     controlled by the Heidelberg Cement group (“Heidelberg”), which is active in the
     production and sale of cement and cement related products. Cementbouw is controlled
     by CVC Capital Partners Group (“CVC”), an investment funds company.
1    OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
     Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

4. The Joint Venture to be established, will produce and sell aggregates for the concrete
    and asphalt industry.
II. THE OPERATION
5. The proposed transaction consists of Cementbouw acquiring from ENCI 50% of the
    shares in ENCI Zand en Grind B.V. The latter company will consequently be the
    holding company of a joint venture, to be created, which will comprise the aggregates
    business of ENCI.
Joint control
6. Cementbouw and ENCI will jointly control the joint venture, by means of their 50/50
    shareholding in the JV’s holding company, ENCI Zand en Grind BV. Pursuant to the
    Shareholder’s Agreement, and given that each shareholder has equal voting rights and
    significant veto rights, the parties can be considered to have joint control over the joint
    venture.
Full function
7. Seen that the joint venture will consist mainly of the subsidiaries of ENCI Zand en Grind
    BV, an established company with its own management and sufficient resources, it can be
    considered as an ongoing business, performing all the functions of an autonomous
    economic entity on a lasting basis. It may therefore be concluded that the proposed
    transaction is a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
Community dimension
8. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
    than EUR 5 billion2 in 2001 (CVC EUR 21,078 million, Heidelberg EUR 6,689 million,
    joint venture EUR […]). The aggregate Community-wide turnover of the two
    undertakings concerned amounted to more than € 250 million in 2001 (CVC EUR […],
    Heidelberg EUR […]). The undertakings concerned did not achieve more than two-
    thirds of their EU turnover within one and the same member state. On the basis of the
    turnover figures of the parties, it can be concluded that the concentration has a
    Community dimension pursuant to the Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
III. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
9. The joint venture will act as a producer and trader of aggregates, which are sold to
    ready-mixed concrete companies and (road) construction companies in the Netherlands.
    The activities of the joint venture outside the Netherlands (in Belgium and Germany) are
    negligible. The transaction does not lead to significant horizontal overlaps but gives rise
    to a vertically affected market for ready-mixed concrete as both parents are active in this
    market with a combined share of more than 25%. Cementbouw and ENCI are also active
    on the cement and (non) constructive walls markets which are related to aggregates and
    ready-mixed concrete, although the joint venture itself will not be active in these
    markets.
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated into
    EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                           2

Relevant Markets
10. In a previous decision3, the Commission has already defined the relevant markets for
    aggregates and ready-mixed concrete.
      A.Aggregates
11. The term aggregates refers to three primary raw materials in construction and civil
    engineering: gravel, crushed rock and sand. Despite the lack of substitutability between,
    on the one hand, gravel and crushed rock, and on the other hand, sand, the Commission
    has considered aggregates as a whole, rather than defining separate markets for each of
    gravel, crushed rock and sand. This position has been confirmed by the market
    investigation in the present case. In any case, the exact definition of the aggregates
    market(s) can be left open since the operation does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the common market on the basis of alternative product markets.
    Separate markets can be defined for the production (extraction) of aggregates and the
    sale (trade) of these aggregates.
12. The Commission had previously considered the aggregates trade market as being
    local/regional or at most national in scope, in view of the significant transport costs. The
    parties consider that the aggregates trade market has a national dimension as the
    catchment areas of aggregates traders overlap. In the Netherlands, aggregates are
    directly transported from the extraction location to the customers. As such is generally
    (around 80%) done by ship, using trucks only where customers cannot be supplied by
    waterways4, the market investigation has considered the relevant geographical market to
    be the Netherlands. In any case, the exact geographical definition of the aggregates
    market(s) can be left open since the operation does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the common market on the basis of alternative geographical markets.
    The market for the extraction of aggregates is at least national in scope.
      B.Ready-mixed concrete
13. Ready-mixed concrete is used as a base for on-site moulded concrete constructions. In
    the Commission’s Skanska/Scancem decision, ready-mixed concrete was considered to
    be a distinct market. As ready-mixed concrete is perishable, it can only be transported
    by mixer-trucks over short distances (covering about one hour), which makes the
    geographical market local/regional in scope. However, according to the parties, in the
    Netherlands the catchment areas of the 150 ready-mixed concrete production plants
    overlap to such extent that the equivalent conditions of competition throughout the
    Netherlands are reproduced. Such has been confirmed by the market investigation. In
    any case, the exact geographical definition of the Ready-mixed concrete can be left open
    since the operation does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
    market on the basis of alternative geographical markets.
3   See Case No. IV/M.1157 – Skanska/Scancem, Commission Decision of 11 November 1998
4   In the Netherlands, most of the aggregates suppliers and ready-mixed concrete customers are located close
    to waterways.
                                                          3

Competition effects
    A. Horizontal Effects
14. ENCI will transfer all its aggregates activities to the joint venture. For the production of
    aggregates, a market where Cementbouw has no presence, the joint venture will have a
    share of [0-5%] of the Dutch market and a lower market share if the market were to
    considered wider than national. For aggregates trade, Cementbouw remains active in this
    market and has a [0-5%] market share in the Netherlands whilst the joint venture holds
    [0-5%], leading to a combined market share of [0-5%] on the Dutch market5. If regional
    markets were to be considered, the combined market share of Cementbouw and the joint
    venture would in any case remain below 10%. As such, the transaction does not lead to
    horizontally affected markets between the joint venture and its parents.
    B. Vertical effects
15. Ready-mixed concrete is produced by mixing cement with aggregates and water.
    Aggregates account for approximately 25% of the total costs of raw materials used for
    ready-mixed concrete.
16. Cementbouw and ENCI have a combined share of [30-40%] (ENCI [20-30%] and
    Cementbouw [10-20%])6 on the Dutch ready-mixed concrete market. When assessed on
    the basis of regional markets, the joint venture’s parents’ combined market shares for
    ready mixed concrete would amount to [20-30%] in the North/East region, [40-50%] in
    the West region and [40-50%] in the South of the Netherlands.
17. As the combined market share of Cementbouw and the joint venture on the upstream
    aggregates trade market is [0-5%] on a national basis and below 10% on any other
    possible relevant geographical market, the parties cannot be considered to be in a
    position to foreclose their ready-mixed concrete competitors from access to aggregates.
    The market investigation has confirmed this, indicating that there are sufficient
    alternative aggregates suppliers and that customers, including ready-mixed concrete
    plants, can and do easily switch to other suppliers.
18. Also, it is unlikely that the operation would result in demand foreclosure. Currently,
    Cementbouw and ENCI use around [40-50%] of the joint venture’s future output
    captively, and the parties submit that it is not to be expected that such would increase
    dramatically as the joint venture will operate at arms length from its parents. Aggregates
    trading competitors to the parties have confirmed that Cementbouw’s and ENCI’s
    aggregates needs significantly exceed the current output of the joint venture’s aggregates
    output.
    C. Co-ordination effects
19. The Commission has examined whether the operation would give rise to a risk of co-
    ordination between the joint venture’s parents on the ready-mixed concrete market, the
5   With similar market shares for gravel, crushed rock and sand.
6   Market shares as provided by the parties and based on a participation based calculation, whereby sales of
    the ready-mixed concrete plants are attributed to the parties proportionally to the participation ratio,
    disregarding whether the companies concerned are fully, jointly or non-controlled. A control based
    calculation results in lower market shares.
                                                          4

    cement markets and the (non) constructive walls markets, in accordance with Article 2
    (4) of the Merger Regulation.
20. The Commission’s investigation has not indicated concerns that the creation of the joint
    venture could lead to the co-ordination of its parent’s market behaviour. Indeed, post-
    transaction, ENCI will no longer be active on the aggregates markets as it will transfer
    all its aggregates activities to the joint venture. As indicated above, the combined market
    share of Cementbouw and the JV on the aggregates trade market is only [0-5%].
21. […] Cementbouw and ENCI have market shares in excess of 25% in the cement markets
    and markets for (non) constructive walls, which are respectively up-stream and remotely
    down stream of ready-mixed concrete. However, as the scope of the joint venture is
    limited to aggregates, it is unlikely that its creation could lead to co-ordination of
    competitive behaviour of undertakings that remain otherwise independent.
IV.      CONCLUSION
22. In light of the above, the Commission has concluded that the proposed transaction is not
    likely to create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which effective
    competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that
    area.
23. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC)
    No 4064/89.
                                                         For the Commission
                                                         Mario MONTI
                                                         Member of the Commission
                                                     5
