                             COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                                 Brussels, 28.04.2004
                                                                                 SG-Greffe(2004) D/201762
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article 17(2)                                      PUBLIC VERSION
of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 concerning
non-disclosure of business secrets and other
confidential information. The omissions are shown                                      MERGER PROCEDURE
thus […]. Where possible the information omitted has                               ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
been replaced by ranges of figures or a general
description.
                                                                                To the notifying parties
Dear Sir,
Subject:          Case No COMP/M.3395 – Sampo / If Skadeförsäkring
                  Notification of 24.03.2004 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                  No 4064/891
1. On 24.03.2004, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
     pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/892 as last amended by
     Regulation (EC) No 1310/973 by which the Finnish undertaking Sampo Oyj (‘Sampo’)
     acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control of the
     whole of the Swedish If Skadeförsäkring Holding AB (‘If’‘) by way of increasing their
     share holding from approximately 38% to 90%.
I.         THE PARTIES
2. Sampo offers investment, savings (including life insurance) and banking services to
     retail, corporate and institutional customers principally in Finland. It was established in
     2001 when Leonia Oyj, a Finnish state-owned banking group merged into Sampo
     Insurance Company Plc. Later on in 2001 also a private investment bank, Mandatum
     Pankki Oyj joined the group.
1 OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 257 of 21.9.1990, p. 13; Regulation as last amended by
  Regulation (EC) No 1310/97 (OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1, corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17).
2 OJ L 395, 30.12.1989 p. 1; corrigendum: OJ L 257, 21.9.1990, p. 13.
3 OJ L 180, 9. 7. 1997, p. 1; corrigendum OJ L 40, 13.2.1998, p. 17.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

3. If provides non-life insurance products mainly to customers in Sweden, Norway,
     Finland, Denmark and the Baltic Countries. The company is presently under the joint
     control of Sampo, Försäkringsaktiebolaget Skandia (‘Skandia’, Sweden),
     Livförsäkringsaktiebolaget Skandia (publ) (‘Skandia Liv’, Sweden) Storebrand ASA
     (‘Storebrand’, Norway) and Keskinäinen työeläkevakuutusyhtiö Varma (‘Varma’
     Finland).
II.       THE OPERATION
4. The concentration is a transaction whereby Sampo will purchase all the shares in If
     currently owned by Skandia (19.36 %), Skandia Liv (10.06 %) and Storebrand (22.47
     %). The Sale and Purchase Agreement to this effect was entered into on 11 February
     2004.
5. Following the closing of the notified transaction Sampo would become the owner of
     89.94% of the share capital and 89.54% of the voting rights in If. Varma will maintain
     its holding of the outstanding share capital and voting rights (some 10%). As Sampo,
     Skandia, Storebrand and Varma have agreed to terminate the existing Shareholders’
     Agreement and as the new Shareholders’ Agreement entered into between Sampo and
     Varma on 12 February 2004 does not contain any provisions conferring joint control, If
     will come under the sole control of Sampo.
III.      COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6. In 2003 the world-wide turnover of Sampo was approximately €2,35 billion and of If €
     4,26 billion. The combined aggregate world-wide turnover of the parties therefore
     exceeded € 5 billion. The aggregate Community-wide turnover was more than € 250
     million […]. The parties do not achieve more than two-thirds of their respective
     aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The
     concentration therefore has a Community dimension. The case also constitutes a co-
     operation case in accordance with Article 2 (a) of Protocol 24 to the EEA Agreement.
V.       COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
A) Relevant product markets
     (i) Horizontal Relationships
7. If provides non-life insurance services and Sampo life insurance and banking services.
     The Commission has in previous decisions considered banking services separately from
     non-life and life insurance markets4.
8. In previous decisions the Commission has also distinguished between life and non-life
     insurances5 and has held that these form separate product markets. Life and non-life
     insurances could further be divided into as many product markets as there are different
4 Case No COMP/M.2676 – Sampo/Varma Sampo/If Holding/JV
5 Case No COMP/M.2676 – Sampo/Varma Sampo/If Holding/JV
  Case No COMP/M.759 – Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance para 6-7
                                                          2

     kinds of risks to be covered given that their characteristic, purpose and premiums are
     distinct and that there is typically no substitutability between these products from the
     customer’s perspective. However, the parties submit that due to the very similar
     conditions for insuring different types of risks and the use of the same distribution
     channels, all non-life insurance products should be considered to belong to the same
     product market. They propose a similar approach regarding life insurances. With respect
     to life insurances, the parties also wish to point out that all life insurance companies can
     provide all different life insurance products to all kinds of customers, especially in
     Finland where the life insurance market is very small. It should therefore not be possible
     for a company to operate only in one insurance category.
9. Following the Commission decision allowing the transfer of Sampo’s non-life insurance
     business to If6, Sampo currently only provides life insurance services, whereas If only
     provides non-life insurance services. The parties therefore submit that there is no
     horizontal overlap between their activities.
(ii) Vertical Relationships
10. There are possible vertical relationships between the parties’ activities in insurance
     policy management and claims handling, reinsurance and the distribution of insurances.
     However, Sampo and If submit that they do not provide policy management or claims
     handling services to third parties, and they do not underwrite any assumed reinsurance
     in the open market, and they do not have any market share in such a market.
11. Regarding insurance distribution, the parties submit that they currently distribute, to a
     very minor extent, each other’s non-life and life insurance policies.
12. According to the parties the relevant market for either non-life or life insurance
     distribution comprises all outward distribution channels, for example agents, brokers
     and other intermediaries, such as banks. They consider that insurance companies own
     sales forces and office networks should be excluded as they form an inherent and
     inseparable part of the insurance companies’ normal business. Outward distributors also
     provide the insured end customer with additional services. Even if certain outward
     distribution channels would to some extent be substitutable with the insurance
     companies’ own sales force, the parties submit that competing insurance companies do
     not themselves consider each other as true alternative distribution channels.
13. As competition issues could not arise in any alternative market definition considered, it
     is not necessary to exactly define the relevant product markets in the present case.
B) Relevant geographic markets
14. Sampo offers insurance services to customers principally in Finland but also in Eastern
     Europe. If is active particularly in Denmark, Finland, Sweden and Norway, with a lesser
     degree of activity in France, Germany, the Netherlands and the UK as well as in Eastern
     Europe. The Commission has previously considered the markets for both non-life
     insurances and life insurances to be principally national in scope, although there may
     exist some differences in the geographical scope of different types of non-life
     insurances. As far as life insurance for private households are concerned, the relevant
6 Case No COMP/M.2676 – Sampo/Varma Sampo/If Holding/JV
                                                      3

     markets seem at present to be mainly national, in view of the established market structures,
     the need for adequate distribution channels, fiscal constraints and differing national
     regulatory systems7. With respect to non-life insurance, the Commission has in previous
     cases found that non-life insurance markets are national as a result of national
     distribution channels, the established market structures, fiscal constraints and differing
     regulatory systems8 whereas the markets for reinsurance and the insurance of certain
     large risks would be global9.
15. The parties therefore submit that the markets for life insurances, non-life insurances
      and their distribution would be national in scope. However, as competition issues
      could not arise in any alternative market definition considered, it is not necessary to
      exactly define the relevant geographic market in the present case.
C) Assessment
16. This transaction constitutes a change from joint to sole control over If. As indicated
     already above, there is no horizontal overlap between the parties’ current activities.
     However, the vertical relationships between the parties in insurance distribution in
     Finland have been analysed. If currently distributes Sampo’s life insurances, whereas
     Sampo distributes If’s non-life insurances. These reciprocal arrangements for the
     distribution of policies were made between the parties when Sampo transferred its non-
     life business to If.
(i) Life insurance distribution
17. According to the statistics of the Finnish Insurance Supervision Authority, Sampo has a
     market share of approximately 17,6 % in the Finnish life insurance market. Sampo does
     not offer life insurances in any other country within the EEA. The parties have
     confirmed that the position of If in the downstream market of life insurance distribution
     in Finland would reflect a market share of [0-5]%. This vertical relationship does
     therefore not constitute a vertically affected market.
 (ii) Non-life insurance distribution
18. The total non-life market share of If would amount to approximately 34.6% in Finland.
     In some non-life insurance policies, such as marine, aviation and railway insurances its
     market share is estimated to be higher. If’s main competitors in Finland are Pohjola,
     with an estimated total market share of 20,6 % and Tapiola 15,5 %. Recently a new
     viable and powerful competitor, Nordea Non-life Insurance has entered the market.
     Sampo does not distribute any other company’s non-life insurances than If’s. The parties
     submit that the market share of Sampo in the downstream distribution market of non-life
     insurance products in Finland is insignificant, representing approximately [less than 1]%
     of the market. In spite of Sampo’s low market share in non-life insurance distribution,
     this vertical relationship constitutes an affected market.
 (iii) Conclusion on the vertical relationships
7   See Cases IV/M.759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance or IV/M.862 - Axa/UAP.
8   See, for example, Cases IV/M.759 – Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance, Commission decision of 18.6.1996 and
    COMP/M.2225 – Fortis /ASR, Commission decision of 13.12.2000.
9   See, for example, Case IV/M.862 – Axa/UAP, Commission decision of 20.12.1996.
                                                             4

19. The proposed concentration cannot be considered to lead to any material changes in the
    market place. Sampo is already currently a jointly controlling parent in If. The
    Commission’s investigation in the previous case10 already covered the (horizontal)
    effects on competition resulting from the combination of Sampo and If and the
    transaction was not considered to raise any competition concerns.
20. More specifically, the proposed concentration does not change anything in respect of the
    distribution of the insurances either. Vertical integration does not seem to be an
    important issue in the insurance distribution and the current distribution arrangements
    between the parties are based on the structural connections between Sampo and If. Even
    if the vertical relationship between the parties in the distribution of non-life insurances
    in Finland constitutes an affected market, it is highly unlikely that the concentration will
    have any impact on competition in the market.
21. Neither Sampo or If are considered to compete with true “distribution operators”, such
    as brokers or agents, and other insurance companies do not see them as a potential
    distribution channels. It should also be noted that in general all insurance companies
    have their own sales force and office networks, and that for example in Finland 60 % of
    the value of insurances is estimated to be sold through the companies directly. There are
    no significant costs involved in the entry to the insurance distribution market. According
    to the parties, practically any retail chain may start to distribute non-life insurances by
    entering into a cooperation agreement with an insurance company.
22. In view of the foregoing, it can be concluded that the proposed operation would not, in
    any of the markets considered, raise foreclosure or other vertical competition concerns as a
    result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any
    substantial part of that area.
VI. CONCLUSION
23. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC)
    No 4064/89.
                                                        For the Commission
                                                        Mario MONTI
                                                        Member of the Commission
10 Case No COMP/M.2676 – Sampo/Varma Sampo/If Holding/JV
                                                   5
