3.   The main activity of Fortis is insurance, it also has operations in banking and other
     financial services. Its operations are principally based in Belgium and in the
     Netherlands, with a presence in some other Member States. Fortis was formed by the
     merger between Compagnie Financière et de Réassurance du Groupe AG (AG) and
     N.V. AMEV (AMEV) in 1990 (see Case IV/M.O18 AG/AMEV -21.11.1990).
4.   Holding wholly owns ASLK/CGER Bank and ASLK/CGER Insurance. Holding's
     principal activities through these companies are insurance, banking and financial
     services. Holding also holds 100% shareholdings in the Caisse Nationale de Crédit
     Professionel (CNCP) and the Institut National de Crédit Agricole (INCA), two small
     public interest aimed credit institutions whose partial sale is being negotiated at the
     present.
II.  COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in
     excess of 5,000 million ECU. Fortis, Holding and ASLK/CGER Insurance have a
     Community turnover in excess of 250 million ECU but do not both achieve more
     than two thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the
     same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
III. CONCENTRATION
6.   According to the agreements between the notifying parties, as reflected in the
     proposed articles of association of the new entities to be set up, the business conduct
     is to be carried out in a spirit of partnership. Both parties have equal shareholdings
     and they both have equal numbers of directors on the boards of both ASLK/CGER
     Bank and ASLK/CGER Insurance. These elements all would point to joint control of
     both by Fortis and Holding. However, the decision making mechanisms of the
     boards of the two entities are very different and are therefore considered
     separately.[...]1
     Voting mechanisms
     ASLK/CGER Insurance
7.   In the case of ASLK/CGER Insurance, decisions are taken by simple majority.
     Where deadlock is reached matters are referred to the Concertation Committee
     described in paragraph 9 below. Only if the Concertation Committee is deadlocked,
     is the Fortis casting vote used.
     ASLK/CGER Bank
1
     [Business secret]. As a result, a casting vote is conferred on Fortis in the case of
     ASLK/CGER Insurance and one of the Fortis representatives has a double vote in
     the case of ASLK/CGER Bank.
                                             2

8.  So far as ASLK/CGER Bank is concerned, the board of ASLK/CGER Bank (the
    Conseil d'administration - which defines the general policy of the bank) is composed
    of [...]2 representatives from each of Fortis and Holding (with one of the Fortis
    representatives having a double vote) . The board proposes appointments to the [...]2
    places on the Comité de direction (which is responsible for day to day management)
    who become members of the board. Their appointment is subject to the approval of
    the Belgian Banking and Financial Commission. A qualified majority is required for
    decisions of strategic importance. [...] 3 .
9.  The shareholders agreement together with the proposed articles of association
    defines the relationship, which is to be built around the concept of partnership,
    between both shareholders in terms of management of the two companies. The
    preponderant voting rights conferred to Fortis have to be read in conjunction with
    Article 3.3 of the Shareholders Agreement which provides that when a dispute arises
    between the two groups of Board Members regarding a Board matter [...]3, it is
    submitted to a Concertation Committee. If the Committee is unable to resolve the
    dispute, the matter is then referred to the Board which then takes the decision using,
    if necessary, the casting vote.
    Control
10. The two different board structures and voting mechanisms of ASLK/CGER
    Insurance and ASLK/CGER Bank lead to different conclusions over control.
11. In the case of ASLK/CGER Insurance, because of the casting vote conferred on
    Fortis in the event of deadlock, Holding will not have the means to oppose the
    majority voting powers of Fortis and therefore, Fortis alone will ultimately have the
    possibility of exercising a decisive influence on the affairs of the company.
12. [...]3 This conclusion is based solely on the criterion of the possibility of exercising a
    decisive influence laid down in Article 3(3) of Regulation 4064/89 and has no
    bearing on the concept of control under national legislation or in the understanding
    of the parties.
    Joint venture performing on a lasting basis all the functions of an autonomous
    economic entity.
2
    [Business secret]. It concerns the number of members of the board.
3
    [Business secret]. In the case of ASLK/CGER Bank, the board structure and voting
    mechanisms of the board are different, as a result of which Fortis and Holding have
    joint control of ASLK/CGER Bank. The existence of joint control in the bank is
    based on the possibility for Holding to block a Fortis proposal, taking into account
    the votes of the Comité de Direction.
                                             3

13. ASLK/CGER Bank will act on the Belgian market as an independent and
    autonomous economic entity. Every means will be given to it to develop its business
    and its commercial policy independently and for an unlimited time.
    Absence of coordination of competitive behaviour
14. Holding will also remain active in the financial services sector in Belgium through
    Caisse Nationale de Crédit Professionel (CNCP) and Institut National de Crédit
    Agricole (INCA). The aim of CNCP is to finance and to assist privately owned
    institutions specializing in credit to small and medium sized companies. INCA
    manages agricultural funds set up by the State and acts as a clearing basis and fund
    manager for privately owned agricultural banks, which collect funds and grant loans
    to their own clients through their own networks. INCA itself has no network. The
    Royal Decree of 29 September provides that 50% of the shares in those two
    companies will be transferred to private credit institutions. Both undertakings have
    no direct presence in the fields of activities of ASLK/CGER Bank. As a result, there
    is no risk of coordination between these public credit institutions and ASLK/CGER
    Bank.
15. Also, the Belgian State is still present in the banking sector through the "Office
    Central de Crédit Hypotécaire" (OCCH), a mortgage institute, which the Belgian
    State intends to dispose of and which in the meantime is managed by the "Crédit
    Communal", a bank owned by the "Communes" and the "Provinces". Given this and
    without prejudicing the decision as to whether ASLK/CGER Bank and OCCH are
    part of a single decision-making authority there is no risk of co-ordination between
    the OCCH and ASLK/CGER Bank.
16. Fortis will be present in the Belgian financial markets through the ASLK/CGER
    Bank, in which it will play a determinant role, and to a very limited extent through
    its wholly owned subsidiary Metropolitan Bank. Metropolitan Bank accounts for a
    small share of the Belgian retail banking market (of the order of [...]4). There is
    insignificant competition between Metropolitan Bank and ASLK/CGER Bank.
17. As a result, it is considered that the present operation does not have as its object or
    effect the co-ordination of the competitive behaviour of undertakings which remain
    independent.
18. Thus, the notified operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article
     3(1)b of the Regulation.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
    RELEVANT PRODUCT AND GEOGRAPHICAL MARKETS
    BANKING
4
    [Business secret]. Less than 5%.
                                            4

19. The banking sector can be divided into three broad subsectors: retail banking,
    corporate banking and financial markets.
20. Retail banking can be further divided into a number of individual product groups.
    These product groups include current accounts, savings accounts, bonds, pension
    funds, short term and long term loans, mortgages and SICAVs (sociétés
    d'investissement à capital variable).
21. Each banking product is distinct, but the degree of substitutability between different
    products is difficult to appreciate. There is no substitutability between certain
    banking product groups but the divisions between other are far less clear. Banks do
    not generally offer only one type of account or loan so there is a strong linkage
    between the different product groups within the retail banking sector.
22. Corporate banking includes domestic corporate banking, banking for the public
    sector and international credits to public companies. Financial markets includes
    activities related to government funds and money markets.
23. From the geographical point of view, although a growing internationalisation of the
    sector can be observed, the activities of the retail banking sector will for a certain
    period still be national in scope.
24. The precise delimitation of the relevant product market need not to be further
    defined in the present case because even on the basis of a narrower definition, the
    operation does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
    market.
    Insurance
25. It is considered that there exist as many product markets as there are insurances for
    different kinds of risk, since their characteristics, premiums and purposes are quite
    distinct from the consumer's viewpoint. Consequently they are not to any great
    extent substitutable for one another. Thus, life insurance and each type of non life
    insurance seem to constitute separate product markets. Reinsurance constitutes
    another market because of its purpose of spreading the risks between insurers.
    Although insurance markets may become more open to intra-community
    competition in the foreseeable future, geographic markets seem at present to be
    mostly national in view of differences of national regulatory systems.
    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
26. The market where a significant overlap arises from the concentration is Belgium.
    Outside this member State there is no or only insignificant overlap of activities of the
    parties to the concentration.
    Banking
                                           5

27. Société Générale de Belgique (SGB), a major player in Belgian financial markets,
    holds a 19.96% shareholding in, and is represented by three members on the board of
    AG, which in turn holds a 11.8% stake in SGB. This does not allow SGB the
    possibility to exercise decisive influence on the business operation of AG or on
    Fortis. The market shares of SGB are considered to be separate from those of Fortis
    and ASLK/CGER Bank for the purposes of competitive assessment.
28. The activities of the Belgian banking subsidiary of Fortis, Metropolitan Bank, only
    overlap to a minor extent with those of ASLK/CGER Bank which has a relatively
    strong position in Belgian banking markets. The increase of market shares will be
    well below[...]5 except for the following retail banking product groups: high return
    saving accounts [...]5, pension funds [...]5 and mortgages[...]5 giving the new entity
    combined market shares of [...]6, [...]6 and [...]6 respectively.
29. There are a number of strong players well established in the Belgian market who
    have the ability to compete effectively with the combined entity including: Générale
    de Banque, Crédit Communal de Belgique, Banque Bruxelles Lambert and
    Kredietbank. Each of these competitors offers a comparable product range to the
    combined entity.
30  As a result, it is not expected that the proposed concentration will create or
    strengthen a dominant position in any of the affected banking markets.
    Insurance
31. Fortis, through its 50% stake in Delta Capital, the remaining 50% being held by
    AGF, holds a 56.5% stake in Assubel-Vie, Assubel-Vie is a Belgian company
    particularly strong in life insurance in Belgium where it holds a market share of
    approximately [...]7 for life, sickness and work accident insurance. A further 18% of
    Assubel-Vie is held by COBEPA. Taking into account the role of COBEPA in the
    business conduct of Assubel-Vie, this shareholding does not give Fortis the
    possibility of exercising a decisive influence on Assubel-Vie. Assubel-Vie is
    considered to be in a competitive relationship with Fortis and, therefore, the market
    shares held by Assubel-Vie are are not added to those of Fortis for the purposes of
    competitive assessment.
32. The affected insurance product groups and the combined market shares of the new
    entity are: life (group) [...]8, life (individual) [...]8, sickness [...]8, fire [...]8, credit
    [...]9, non-vehicle legal expenses [...]9, accident [...]9, liability [...]9, financial losses
5
    [Business secret]. Less than 5%.
6
    [Business secret]. Less than 20%.
7
    [Business secret]. Less than 15%.
8
    [Business secret]. Between 20% and 30%.
9
    [business secret]. Between 10% and 20%.
                                             6

        [...]9, motor hull [...]9 and vehicle legal expenses [...]9. The parties are not active in
        reinsurance.
33.     Although the combined entity will have significant economic and financial power
        and it will achieve rather high market shares, it will remain exposed to the
        competition of other strong operators. Well established insurers are already present
        in the Belgian market.
34.     As to potential competition, Belgium is often used by the large European insurers as
        a test market and it is highly probable that some of them will remain in the Belgian
        market. It is also possible that others will enter the market in the future.
35.     Whilst there are a number of insurance companies who offer a broad product range,
        few operate in every market. There are also a number of specialist companies in
        particular product groups. Different product groups address different types of risks -
        the administration of insurance policies is similar regardless of the product group.
        Nevertheless from a supply side perspective, any insurance company which is not
        involved in a particular product group could diversify relatively easily into another
        group to compete with the combined entity.
36.     Thus, it is not expected that the proposed concentration will create or strengthen a
        dominant position in any of the affected insurance markets.
V.      CONCLUSION
37.     For all the foregoing reasons, the proposed concentration does not raise serious
        doubts as to its compatibility with the common market.
                                                 *
                                               *    *
For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and
to declare it compatible with the common market. This decision is adopted in application of
Article 6(1) (b) of Council Regulation No. 4064/89.
For the Commission
                                                 7
