                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 17-09-2004
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2004) D/204028
                                                                         PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                      MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                To the notifying parties:
 In the published version of this decision, some
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 139/2004
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.3547 - Banco Santander/Abbey National
               Notification of 13/08/2004 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
               No 139/20041
1.    On 13 August 2004 the Commission received a notification of a proposed
      concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 139/2004 by which
      Banco Santander Central Hispano, S.A. (“Banco Santander”) acquires within the
      meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of Council Regulation 139/2004, control of the whole of
      Abbey National plc (“Abbey”) by way of purchase of shares.
2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
      operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No 139/2004 and does not raise
      serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA
      Agreement.
1    OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

I.    THE PARTIES
3.    Banco Santander is a Spanish holding company for the Banco Santander group.
      Banco Santander group is a group of banking and financial companies operating
      mainly in Spain and in some other European countries, including Austria, Czech
      Republic, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Portugal and Norway and in Latin America. Banco
      Santander is mainly active in asset management and private banking, corporate
      banking, investment banking and treasury.
4.    Abbey is a UK banking group with a focus on the UK banking market. In the UK
      Abbey is active in banking and savings (such as residential mortgages, banking and
      consumer credit, offshore account services), investment and protection (includes
      investment and savings, pensions and pension schemes, protection policies), general
      insurance (covers non-life insurance products and payment protection insurance) and
      treasury services (including asset and liability management, financial products, short
      term markets and financing). Outside the UK Abbey currently operates only in France
      where it has negligible activities offering only residential mortgages, commercial and
      residential lending and consumer credit.
II.   THE OPERATION
5.    Under the proposed operation Banco Santander intends to acquire the whole of the
      issued and to be issued ordinary share capital of Abbey. The proposed operation will
      be implemented by way of a court approved scheme of arrangement pursuant to section
      425 of the UK Companies Act 1985. The operation is subject to sanction by
      shareholders of Banco Santander and Abbey, as well as subject to approval by High
      Court of Justice in England and Wales.
III. CONCENTRATION
6.    Following implementation of the operation Banco Santander will acquire sole
      ownership and control of Abbey, by way of purchase of shares. The notified operation
      therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of Council
      Regulation No 139/2004.
7.    Certain aspects of the Strategic Alliance arrangements, including board
      representations, between Banco Santander and Royal Bank of Scotland entered into in
      1988 were terminated at notification of the proposed operation. The termination of
      these arrangements has been considered as a fact in the assessment of the proposed
      operation (see further below under assessment).
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8.    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
      than EUR 5 billion2. Each of Banco Santander and Abbey have a Community-wide
      turnover in excess of EUR 250 million, but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of
      their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). To the extent that figures include turnover for the
    period before 1.1.1999, they are calculated on the basis of average ECU exchange rates and translated
    into EUR on a one-for-one basis.
                                                         2

    The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension under Article 1(2) of
    Council Regulation No 139/2004.
V.  COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
9.  The notified operation primarily concerns the banking and financial services market in
    the United Kingdom. Abbey‘s commercial activities focus on the UK banking and
    financial services market, whereas Banco Santander’s own activities in the UK are
    limited. However as explained below in detail, since 1988 Banco Santander has been
    linked on a contractual basis with the UK based Royal Bank of Scotland (“RBS”). RBS
    is a major provider of a wide range of financial and banking services in the United
    Kingdom.
Cooperation between Royal Bank of Scotland and Banco Santander
10. In 1988 Banco Santander and RBS entered into a Strategic Cooperation Agreement.
    […].
11. Prior to notification of the proposed operation the parties' decided to modify their
    strategic cooperation arrangement. In particular, RBS and Banco Santander agreed to
    terminate the representation on each others’ Board of Directors, the commercial
    cooperation, as well as any cooperation in joint venture operations in Europe as set out
    in the Agreement. The termination of cooperation in these areas is conditional only
    upon the implementation of the notified operation. Pending the implementation of the
    notified operation Banco Santander and RBS have each procured that their respective
    representatives on the Boards of Directors of the other bank do not attend any board
    meetings […].
12. The only link remaining between RBS and Banco Santander is a limited cross-
    shareholding. At notification Banco Santander held 5.06% of the ordinary shares in
    RBS and RBS 2.83% of the shares in Banco Santander. On 9 September 2004the
    Commission was informed that Banco Santander is reducing its shareholding in RBS to
    2.54% of RBS’s issued ordinary share capital. The Commission has found that these
    shareholdings would not entitle either of RBS or Banco Santander to exercise any
    substantial influence over the others commercial activities.
13. In the course of the Commission’s investigation, a third party raised concerns about the
    close commercial relationship between RBS and Banco Santander. It was submitted
    that due to the strategic cooperation arrangements between RBS and Banco Santander,
    the proposed transaction would allow RBS and Banco Santander/Abbey to coordinate
    their activities in the United Kingdom. In particular, this could lead to a reduction of
    competition in the United Kingdom personal current accounts’ market, higher prices
    and loss of innovation.
14. Given that the commercial cooperation between Banco Santander and RBS is
    terminated (subject only to the condition of completion), these concerns have been
    eliminated.
15. The same third party also pointed to a planned outsourcing of a part of Abbey’s
    business to RBS after the acquisition of Abbey by Banco Santander. According to the
    information submitted by Banco Santander, no such plan forms part of the proposed
    transaction. Therefore, the possible future arrangement has not been considered part of
    the notified operation. This does not preclude that in case the parties' were in the future
                                                 3

      to agree an outsourcing arrangement, that cooperation could require scrutiny either by
      the Commission or a national authority.
Relevant product market
16. The notifying party submits, in accordance with previous Commission decisions, that
      the banking sector may be divided into three broad sub-sectors: retail banking,
      corporate banking and financial services3, which may possibly be further sub-divided
      into individual product groups.
17. However, given that the activities of Banco Santander and Abbey do not overlap or
      their overlap does not trigger a common market share in excess of 15% irrespective of
      product market definition, the relevant product market definition can left open in this
      case.
Relevant geographic market
18. The notifying party submits, in accordance with previous Commission decisions4, that
      as regards banking services to households, the geographic market is national in scope.
      As regards the corporate banking market, the notifying party also refers to previous
      Commission decisions in which the Commission has generally taken the view that
      certain products provided for SMEs will continue to be required and supplied at
      national level, whereas some corporate banking services offered mostly to large
      corporate clients might have a more international dimension5.
19. Given that the activities of Banco Santander and Abbey either do not overlap or their
      overlap does not trigger a common market share in excess of 15% irrespective of
      market definition, either for the provision of retail or corporate banking services, the
      geographic market definition may be left open in this case.
Assessment of the notified operation
20. Both Banco Santander and Abbey are providers of banking services to households and
      SMEs. However, there is no overlap between the parties’ activities at national level as
      Abbey is present in the UK and to a limited extent in France and Banco Santander only
      in Spain. Banco Santander has offices in London and Paris, but these only source
      corporate banking activities. Therefore, the proposed operation does not raise any
      competition concerns as regards banking services to households or SMEs.
21. In relation to corporate banking services provided to large international companies,
      where the relevant geographic market may be wider than national, the proposed
      transaction will not give rise to any material overlaps between Banco Santander and
      Abbey. The Banco Santander’s group presence in Europe is concentrated on retail
      banking in Spain and Portugal and its international corporate activities make up only a
      very small amount of the group's business. In the UK, Banco Santander’s London
      branch involved in wholesale corporate banking generated negligible revenue of […]
3 See for example Case IV/M.342 Fortis/CGER and Case IV/M.1029 Merita/Nordbanken
4 See for example Case IV/M.873 Bank Austria/Creditanstalt
5 See for example Case IV/M.873 Bank Austria/Creditanstalt and Case IV/M.1029 Merita/Nordbanken
                                                       4

    EUR in 2003, which would correspond to a market share well below 1 %. Considering
    that Banco Santander’s market share in the entire Spanish banking market is around
    [15-25%], it is clear that its market share on an EU or the EEA-wide corporate
    banking market would be well below 15%. The same applies to Abbey, as it is only
    active in two corporate banking product segments in the UK; financial market services
    and lending/mortgages, with a estimated market share of less than 1% in the UK.
    Therefore, the proposed operation does not raise competition concerns as regards such
    activities either.
22. There is no material overlap between Banco Santander and Abbey in the financial
    services market. Abbey is either not present in the individual product segments or its
    activities are negligible (less than 1%). Therefore, the proposed operation does not
    raise any competition concerns as regards these markets.
VI. CONCLUSION
23. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                    For the Commission
                                                    (signed)
                                                    Mario MONTI
                                                    Member of the Commission
                                                5
