                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 29.03.2006
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2006) D/201372/3
   In the published version of this decision, some
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article                       PUBLIC VERSION
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                       MERGER PROCEDURE
   general description.                                             ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.3786 – BPI / Euler Hermes / COSEC
               Notification of 22/02/2006 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
               No 139/20041
  1.    On 22 February 2006, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
      concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by which
      the undertakings Euler Hermes SFAC (“EH SFAC”, France) and Banco BPI S.A.
      (“BPI”, Portugal) acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of Council Regulation
      (EC) No 139/2004 joint control over Companhia de Seguro de Créditos S.A.
      (“COSEC”, Portugal).
2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
      operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 and does not
      raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the EEA
      agreement.
I.    THE PARTIES
  3.    EH SFAC is an insurance company within the Euler Hermes Group, which is active
      in the credit insurance business, offering solutions for the management of trade
      receivables, in particular credit insurance, trade debt collection services, bonding,
      evaluating trade receivable portfolios and fidelity insurance. EH SFAC is an indirect
      subsidiary of Allianz AG, the ultimate parent company of the Allianz Group.
1    OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

  4.   BPI is the controlling company of the BPI Group. The BPI Group is a universal
     financial group, active in investment banking, private equity, corporate finance and
     asset management and - predominantly - in commercial banking. BPI is also active in
     the management of unit trust (mutual) funds, pension funds and life-capitalisation
     insurance.
  5.   COSEC is a specialised insurance company mainly active in the credit insurance
     business, the guarantee products business and in the field of political risk insurance in
     Portugal.
II.  THE OPERATION
  6.   Currently BPI holds 50% of the shares in COSEC, whereas EH SFAC holds 41.43%
     of COSEC. The notified operation consists of the purchase by EH SFAC of [less than
     10]% of the shares of COSEC, which are currently held by […] […]%, […] […]% and
     diverse individual subscribers […]%.
III. CONCENTRATION
  7.   COSEC is a full function joint venture within the meaning of Article 3(4) of Council
     Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 as it performs and will continue to perform on a lasting
     basis, all the functions of an autonomous economic entity. It has a management
     dedicated to its day-to-day operations and has access to sufficient resources including
     finance, staff and assets in order to conduct on a lasting basis its business activities
     independently from its parent companies.
  8.   COSEC is currently under sole control of BPI. An existing joint venture agreement
     between the parent companies of COSEC provides BPI with a […].
  9.   Following the transaction BPI and EH SFAC will each own 50% of the shares in
     COSEC, and will each appoint […] members of the Management Board. The […]. In
     view of their voting rights both parties would have joint control over decisions taken
     both by the Management Board and by the shareholders meeting.
  10. Thus, the transaction will lead to a change of sole to joint control over COSEC within
     the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
  11. The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of the undertakings concerned is more
     than €5 billion […]. The aggregate Community-wide turnover of each of at least two
     of the undertakings concerned is more than € 250 million […]. Whilst BPI and COSEC
     achieved more than two-thirds of their Community-wide turnover in Portugal in 2004,
     EH SFAC’s ultimate parent, Allianz, did not achieve more than two-thirds of its
     Community-wide turnover in one Member State. The operation has therefore a
     Community dimension in the sense of Article 1(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No
     139/2004.
                                                 2

V.   RELEVANT MARKETS
Product markets
  12. In previous decisions the Commission has considered that the insurance market can
     be segmented into the life, non-life and re-insurance markets. Life and non-life
     insurance can be segmented in as many different products markets as there are
     insurances for specific risks. It was considered that characteristics, premiums and
     application of the individual insurances can be clearly separated and are hardly
     substitutable from the consumers’ perspective2.
  13. Within the non-life insurance market the Commission distinguished a separate market
     for credit insurance. The credit insurance market can be segmented in five segments: i)
     delcredere insurance, ii) capital goods credit insurance, iii) consumer credit insurance,
     iv) fidelity insurance and v) guarantee insurance3.
  14. The only overlap in the activities of the parties concerns delcredere insurance,
     guarantee products and reinsurance.
Delcredere insurance
  15. In previous decisions the Commission considered that the delcredere insurance
     market comprises domestic credit insurance and export credit insurance4. The purpose
     of this type of insurance is to cover risks emanating from customers who are unable to
     pay for goods supplied and services rendered as a result of their insolvency. Domestic
     credit insurance protects the policyholder against insolvency of its domestic customers.
     Export credit insurance protects the policyholder against insolvency of its customers
     abroad. The parties agree with the Commission’s delineation of the market.
  16. Although some respondents to the third party inquiries suggest that the distinction
     between the different segments of credit insurance is not so clear cut and that the
     delcredere insurance should not necessarily be seen as a separate market from the
     broader credit insurance market, for the purpose of this case it is considered that, in
     line with earlier Commission decisions, the relevant product market is constituted by
     delcredere insurance.
Guarantee Products
  17. Guarantee insurance is a type of insurance which covers the will to perform certain
     contractual or statutory obligations. The parties submit that guarantee insurance is part
     of a broader market for guarantee products. Such a broader market for guarantee
     products not only includes guarantee insurance, but also bank guarantees covering
     non-financial risks, which are issued to a third party as a guarantee with regard to the
     fulfilment of obligations, in order to avoid deposits, allowances, prepayments or
     retentions.
2   Cases M. 183 Schweizer Rück/Elvia, M. 429 Winterthur/DBV, M 518 Winterthur /Schweizer Rück, M.
    539 Alianz /Elvia /Lloyd Addriatico and M.759 Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance
3   Case M. 2602 Gerling/NCM
4   Case M. 2602 Gerling/NCM
                                                      3

18. The parties consider that both guarantee insurance and non-financial bank guarantees
     are substitutes, because they both cover the risk concerning the performance of legal
     and contractual obligations undertaken towards private or public entities. According to
     the parties the pricing of both types of guarantee is based on the same risk assessment
     and the same market conditions. The parties add that COSEC and the other insurers
     specialised in guarantee insurance are most of the time in competition with banks. In a
     previous decision, the Commission’s market investigation confirmed the
     substitutability of both types of guarantee5. The current third party enquiries suggest
     that these two types of guarantee are indeed substitutes. Banks and insurance
     companies offer guarantee products on similar terms and the price difference is often
     of less than […]%. Therefore we can define the market as guarantee products.
     Reinsurance
  19. The parties submit that reinsurance is a special form of insurance, the object of which
     is to redistribute the risk between insurers. According to the parties reinsurance can be
     distinguished from primary insurance because of the fact that reinsurance is traded
     between industry specialists and written only with other insurance companies. These
     views are in line with previous Commission decisions6. However, as there are no
     competition concerns in the reinsurance market the exact delineation of the market can
     be left open.
    Geographic markets
    Delcredere insurance
  20. The parties submit that the relevant geographic market for credit insurance including any
     segment thereof (e.g. delcredere insurance) is national in scope. This is confirmed in
     previous Commission decisions7. Local presence, personal contacts and a precise
     knowledge of the local business community is crucial for the business. Further, conditions
     of competition in national markets are heterogeneous. The existence of national markets is
     not contradicted by the fact that multi-national customers often require worldwide
     policies, as in most cases, their subsidiaries conclude additional sub-policies with
     subsidiaries or branches of the credit insurer.
     Guarantee Products
  21. In relation to the guarantee products the parties take the view that the relevant
     geographic market is at least national. This view is supported by previous Commission
     decisions8. It was found that significant differences in the conditions for competition
     existed between the individual national markets, considering the prevailing market
     structures, distribution channels and consumer attitudes. In particular for insurances which
     are primarily sold to private persons, a national delineation of the geographic market was
     considered to be appropriate.
     Reinsurance
5   Case M.813 Allianz/hermes
6   Case M.491 General RE/Kölnische RE
7   Case M. 2602 Gerling/NCM
8   Case M. 813 Allianz/Hermes
                                                     4

  22. In relation to the reinsurance market the Commission has considered the relevant
     geographic market to be world-wide9. This view is supported by the parties.
VI. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
  23. The horizontally affected market, where the parties have combined market shares of
     more than 15% is the delcredere insurance market in Portugal. The guarantee products
     with the parties’ combined market share of [10-15]%10 and the reinsurance market
     with a market share of less than 5% are not considered to be affected markets.
24. The transaction does not lead to significant changes in the structure of any of the
     relevant markets as the parties were already two main shareholders of COSEC before
     the operation and have limited activities in credit insurance and guarantee business
     outside COSEC.
Delcredere insurance
  25. The parties estimate the total value of the Portuguese delcredere insurance market at
     € […] million. The combined market share of the parties on such market is estimated
     by the parties at [45-55]% (COSEC [45-50]%, EH [0-5]%). The size of the market
     share increment of [0-5]% is negligible and normally does not raise competition
     concerns. In this respect the parties refer to the fact that the [0-5]% increment
     represents gross written premiums of € […] only. Moreover, EH’s business in
     delcredere insurance does not result from active marketing, but stems from credit
     insurance contracts entered into by EH with companies outside Portugal, which on a
     group-wide basis also include coverage for Portuguese subsidiaries of these customers.
26. The parties face significant competition in the Portuguese delcredere insurance market.
     Their main competitors are Spanish competitors with local premises, which according
     to the parties form a steadily growing constraint on COSEC’s market position. CyC,
     the main competitor of COSEC in the delcredere insurance market, is Spain’s leading
     credit insurer, ranking fourth globally. Its market share in Portugal has been growing
     steadily and reached [30-35]% in 2004. Mapfre, COSEC’s second most important
     competitor on this market had a market share of [10-15]% in the same year. More
     importantly, over the last three years Mapfre’s market share has been increasing,
     whereas COSEC’s market share has decreased (from [65-70]% in 2002 to [45-50]% in
     2004 and [45-50]% in 2005).
27. Finally, an additional competitive constraint on COSEC delcredere insurance business
     comes from new entrants and potential competition from other insurance companies
     active in Portugal, which have not yet entered the credit insurance business. Recent
     entrants into Portuguese delcredere insurance market include Coface and Atradius
     Seguros de Crédito, which are according to the parties amongst the three world-wide
     leaders in the credit insurance business.
     Considering the above, the transaction is not likely to impede effective competition in
     the delcredere insurance market in Portugal.
9   Case M. 880 Schweizer Re/Uniorias
10  All references to market shares in this document refer to the year 2004, unless explicitly stated otherwise.
                                                          5

 Guarantee products
 28. On the guarantee products market in Portugal the parties have a combined market
    share of [10-15]%, of which COSEC has [0-5]% and BPI [5-10]%. COSEC is only
    active in guarantee insurance products and BPI mainly in bank guarantees for non-
    financial risks. EH has no activities in the Portuguese guarantee market outside
    COSEC.
 29. COSEC faces strong competition from both big and small banks and insurance
    companies. The main banking competitors, which account for 70% of guarantee
    products in Portugal, include Caixa Geralde Depositos, Millenium BCP, Banco Totta
    Santander, Banco Espirito Santo and Montepio Geral. The main competitor among
    insurance companies is Mapfre. Other competitors among insurance companies
    include: AXA Portugal, Companhia de Seguros Traquilidade SA, Império Bonança
    Companhia de Seguros and Companhia des Seguros Fidelidade Mundial, SA.
30. In the light of the low market shares and the presence of strong and numerous
    competitors, the operation is not likely to impede effective competition in the
    guarantee products market in Portugal.
 Vertical relations
31. Given that neither BPI nor EH have a market share exceeding 25% on any product
   market which is a neighbouring market or vertically related to a product market in which
   COSEC is active, it appears that the operation will not provide the parent companies
   with the possibility of eliminating competition in respect of a substantial part of the
   services in question.
VI. CONCLUSION
32. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                   For the Commission
                                                   signed
                                                   Neelie KROES
                                                   Member of the Commission
                                               6
