                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 02.06.2005
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2005) D/202423
  In the published version of this decision, some                     MERGER PROCEDURE
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article                 ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are                      PUBLIC VERSION
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.
                                                                 To the notifying party
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.3740 - Barclays/FöreningsSparbanken/JV
                Notification of 25/04/2005 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
1.     On 26/04/2005, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by which the
       undertakings Barclays Bank plc (“Barclays”, UK), belonging to the Barclays group,
       and FöreningsSparbanken AB (“FSB”, Sweden) acquire joint control of the
       undertaking Mandab Holding AB (“Mandab”, Sweden) by way of purchase of shares
       in a newly created company constituting a joint venture.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the operation
       falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious doubts as to
       its compatibility with the common market and the EEA agreement.
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

I.    THE PARTIES
3.    Barclays is active primarily in banking, investment banking and investment
      management for private and commercial customers. Through Barclaycard it is active in
      the acquiring and issuing of credit cards in Europe. Barclays has limited banking
      activities in Sweden and Norway, where it is only active in investment banking and
      card acquiring services.
4.    FSB provides financial services to private and commercial customers mainly in
      Sweden. FSB is also active in the acquiring and issuing of payment cards in Sweden
      and in the issuing of credit cards in Norway.
5.    Mandab’s principal activity will be the issuing of credit cards, charge cards and store
      cards in Sweden and Norway with the intention of expanding to Denmark and Finland.
II.   THE OPERATION
6.    The proposed operation consists in the establishment by FSB of a new subsidiary
      company in which Barclays will purchase shares, ultimately creating a jointly
      controlled full function joint venture, Mandab. FSB will transfer all its existing credit,
      charge and store card issuing business and related activities in Sweden and Norway to
      Mandab2. Barclays will provide the Barclaycard brand and credit card know-how.
7.    Following the establishment of FSB new subsidiary, Barclays will acquire 40% of the
      shares in Mandab whilst FSB will retain 60%. Under the terms of the Joint Venture
      Agreement, both Barclays and FSB will have to agree on the strategic decisions
      relating to Mandab. Barclays and FSB therefore will acquire joint control over
      Mandab.
8.    Mandab will have its own management and staff and will have access to capital and
      other resources in order to operate independently on a lasting basis. Mandab will
      initially obtain customers through the credit/charge card contracts transferred from
      FSB in Sweden and Norway. In Sweden, Mandab will distribute its products through
      FSB3 and through open market distribution channels. In Norway, Mandab will
      distribute its products through distribution agreements with two Norwegian banks4 and
      open market channels. Moreover, Mandab’s Business Plan establishes that Mandab
      will increase its distribution capability by actively seeking to establish new
      partnerships with third parties and co-brand partners in Sweden and Norway.
      Therefore, the proposed transaction constitutes a full function joint venture.
III. CONCENTRATION
9.    On the basis of the above, the notifying parties will therefore acquire joint control over
      Mandab in the sense of Article 3(1)(b) of Council Regulation 139/2004.
2   FSB will retain the issuing of debit cards to customers in Sweden.
3   During the initial [business secrets] of the volume of Mandab’s business in Sweden is expected to be
    realised through FSB’s channels.
4   FSB does not have distribution assets in Norway.
                                                           2

IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
10. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 billion5. Each of Barclays and FSB has a Community-wide turnover in
     excess of EUR 250 million, but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
     aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The
     notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
11. The parties to the operation will have overlapping activities in the markets for the
     issuing of payment cards and for the acquiring of payment cards.
   Relevant product markets
12. The parties submit that payment card issuing and payment card acquiring6 constitute
     two separate relevant product markets and that there is no need for further
     segmentation thereof.
13. In Case No COMP/M. 2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot, the Commission left open the
     exact market definition both for card issuing and card acquiring. However, the
     Commission suggested that within the payment card issuing market one could
     distinguish between (i) selective and general cards7; (ii) international payment cards
     and national cards8; and (iii) cards issued to households, SMEs and large corporate
     customers. The Commission, however, did not indicate whether debit cards and credit
     cards could also constitute two separate product markets9.
14. In Nordbanken/Postgirot, the Commission also indicated that within the payment card
     acquiring market, the payments made with cards carrying the Visa and
     EuroCard/MasterCard brands may constitute a separate relevant product market.
15. The product market definition in the present case can be left open since the transaction
     will not raise competition concerns in any possible subdivision of the proposed product
     markets.
5  Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
   on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25).
6  The card acquiring market includes a set of services provided to merchants in order to enable them to
   accept payment cards.
7  General cards can be used at all points of sales that accept cards belonging to the system as a method of
   payment and to make withdrawals from automatic teller machines. Selective cards however can only be
   used with certain merchants.
8  National cards can only be used within one country whereas international cards may be used in several
   countries.
9  The only distinguishing feature of credit/charge cards vis-à-vis debit cards is that the former allows the
   cardholder to defer payments. Store cards are marketed via retailers to help finance specific purchases
   and although they may have revolving credit functionality they are typically used by consumers only to
   fund the original transaction.
                                                          3

   Relevant geographic markets
16. The parties submit that the relevant geographic market for the issuing of payment cards
    is national in scope. They reach the same conclusion for the acquiring of payment
    cards. This is in line with past Commission decisions.10
   Assessment
   Card issuing
17. As stated above, Barclays is not active in this sector in Sweden or in Norway. FSB will
    transfer all its credit/charge/store cards issuing business in Sweden and Norway to
    Mandab and therefore there will be no overlap between the parties as regards this
    segment. However, since FSB will retain its activities within the issuing of debit cards,
    there will be some overlaps between Mandab and FSB if we consider an alternative
    segmentation of the card issuing market.
18. In Sweden, the parties’ combined market share will be below 15% even in the
    narrowest product market definition (i.e. subdivision on the basis of the type of card
    and customer). The only segments where FSB and Mandab will exceed 15% are (i) the
    overall segment of general cards, where FSB’s market share before the transaction is
    [40-50%], of which around [1-10%] will be transferred to Mandab11; and, within the
    general cards segment, (ii) the issuing of cards to household customers. FSB currently
    holds [40-50%] of this segment and, after the proposed transaction, [1-10%] of this
    market share will be transferred to Mandab.
19. In Norway, FSB will transfer to Mandab its entire card issuing business. FSB submits
    that its market share does not exceed 15% in any possible market definition.
20. Overall, the proposed transaction will not significantly impede effective competition,
    given that it does not amount to an increase of shares of FSB on any of the possible
    relevant markets. Moreover, the proposed transaction will allow the entry of a new
    player, Barclays, in the Scandinavian card issuing market. Additionally, the parties will
    face competition from other significant players such as Handelsbanken, SEB and
    Nordea in Sweden (all with market shares exceeding 5%) and DnB NOR ([20-25%]),
    Nordea and SEB (with market shares above 5%) in Norway.
Card acquiring
21. Mandab will not be active in the related card acquiring market. However, its parent
    companies are both active in this market in Sweden. FSB’s market share in the overall
    Swedish card acquiring market is around [20-30%]. As regards the segment for
    payments made with cards carrying the Visa and EuroCard/MasterCard brands, FSB’s
    market share in this segment is [40-50%]12. Barclays’ estimates its market share to be
10 See Case No COMP/M.2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot at para. 37.
11 The other [30-40%] correspond to debit cards issued to households. The debit cards issuing business will
   not be transferred to Mandab.
12 FSB submits that all the transactions acquired by FSB’s in 2004 carried these brands.
                                                        4

    below 1% in any of the possible alternative market definitions. Other competitors are
    ICA ([20-25%]%) and KF ([10-20%]).
22. The proposed transaction would not reinforce the competitive position of FSB in the
    card acquiring market since, as mentioned above, the business to be transferred to the
    new joint venture is, pre-merger, solely owned and operated by FSB. Furthermore, on
    the basis of Barclays’ very limited presence in this market, the proposed transaction
    will not create any concerns as regards possible coordination between Mandab’s parent
    companies.
VI. CONCLUSION
23. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                    For the Commission
                                                    signed
                                                    Neelie KROES
                                                    Member of the Commission
                                                5
