                      COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 03.05.2005
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2005) D/202060 - 202061
    In the published version of this decision, some                      PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                 MERGER PROCEDURE
    other confidential information. The omissions are
    shown thus […]. Where possible the information
                                                                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or
    a general description.
                                                                   To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:      Case No COMP/M.3772 – AVIVA/RAC
              Notification of 29.03.2005 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
              No 139/20041
1.   On 29.03.2005, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
     pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (“the Merger
     Regulation”) by which the undertaking Aviva plc (“Aviva”, United Kingdom),
     belonging to the Aviva group, acquires control of the whole of the undertaking RAC
     plc (“RAC”, United Kingdom) by way of public bid announced on 9 March 2005.
2.   After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the operation
     falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 and does not raise
     serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the EEA agreement.
I.   THE PARTIES
3.   Aviva is active primarily in the life and non-life insurance sector. Other businesses
     include long term savings and fund management. Aviva is present worldwide. In the
     UK, it conducts its business under the Norwich Union (“NU”) brand.
4.   RAC provides a range of motoring and vehicle related products and services to
     individual and business customers. Its core activities are roadside assistance (and
1  OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

     related car repair services), driving tuition, vehicle leasing and fleet management. RAC
     has activities in the UK, Ireland and France.
II.  THE OPERATION
5.   Aviva has announced a recommended cash and share offer for the entire issued and to
     be issued share capital of RAC. As a result of the transaction, Aviva will acquire sole
     control of RAC.
III. CONCENTRATION
6.   The operation concerns the acquisition by Aviva of sole control over RAC. The
     proposed transaction therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of
     Article 3(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 billion2. Each of Aviva and RAC has a Community-wide turnover in
     excess of EUR 250 million, but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
     aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The
     notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
8.   The parties have overlapping activities in the non-life insurance market and in the roadside
     assistance services market.
     Insurance market
     Product market
9.   Pursuant to past Commission decisions, the provision of insurance products may be
     subdivided into life insurance, non-life insurance and reinsurance. Further, from a
     demand side perspective, both life and non-life insurance can, in principle, be divided
     into as many product markets as risks covered because of their distinct characteristics,
     purposes and premiums and there is typically no substitute for the consumer among the
     different risks insured.3
10. Given that the activities of the parties either do not overlap or their overlap does not
     exceed 15%, irrespective of market definition, the product market definition may in
     this case be left open.
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25).
3   See Case IV/M. 759 Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance and Case IV/M. 1043 BAT/Zürich.
                                                         2

    Geographic market
11. The Commission has generally considered that the geographical definition of the
    market in life and non-life insurance business is national in scope.4
12. However, given that the activities of the parties either do not overlap or their overlap
    does not exceed 15% irrespective of market definition, the geographic market
    definition may be in this case left open.
    Roadside assistance services
    Product market
13. The parties have submitted that there is a separate market for the provision of roadside
    assistance services. The Commission already analysed this market in the
    CVC/Permira/AA case5 but left open the exact product market definition. However, the
    Commission referred to the 1999 UK Monopolies and Merger Commission report (the
    MMC report) published on this issue. The MMC report concluded that the supply of
    insured breakdown services for light vehicles constitutes a single economic market6.
14. In their submission, the parties consider that ad hoc roadside assistance services
    provided to uninsured drivers should be excluded from the product market definition.
    The parties further consider that the roadside assistance services market should only
    take into account the sales of stand alone roadside assistance services, therefore
    excluding services bundled with motor insurance policies, given that in the latter case
    the predominant purpose of the contract is motor insurance. Additionally, the parties
    also submit that the product market definition should include both direct sales to
    individuals by operators that have their own fleet or which use an independent network
    of affiliated but independently owned and operated assistance vehicles, and indirect
    sales, through intermediaries which purchase in bulk from a supplier with a fleet or
    network and sell it on to end-user customers.
15. The market investigation indicated that as far as ad hoc services are concerned, many
    consider that such services should be excluded from the product market but that both
    direct and indirect sales should be included. Further, the replies to the market
    investigation seem to suggest that both bundled and stand alone services should be
    considered as part of the roadside assistance services market.
16. As far as a possible sub-segmentation of the market on the basis of customer
    preferences and demands is concerned, the parties have suggested that the market
    could be further divided into services provided to (i) consumers who purchase
    contracts on an individual basis and (ii) corporate customers who purchase roadside
    assistance services to cover their own fleet or to resell such services to their own
4  See Case IV/M. 1043 BAT/Zürich and Case M. 2491 Sampo/Storebrand.
5  Case No COMP/M. 3517 CVC/Permira/AA.
6  Cendant Corporation and RAC Holding Limited, February 1999.
                                                    3

     customers, often bundled with another product7. During the market investigation it was
     also suggested that a distinction could be made between customers who buy services
     based upon brand strength and reassurance and those who buy purely on price and
     view the service as a commodity.
17. However, for the purposes of the present case, the exact definition of the product
     market can be left open because in all alternative market definitions, the proposed
     transaction would not significantly impede effective competition (see further below).
     Geographic market
18. Aviva submits that the market for contracted roadside assistance services is national in
     scope. In CVC/Permira/AA the Commission referred to the MMC report which
     concluded that the market was national, on the basis that there were no indications that
     the market conditions varied between different parts of the UK. However, the
     Commission left open the exact geographic market definition.
19. The market investigation confirmed the definition of a national market. In the present
     case, however, the exact geographic market definition can be left open because the
     transaction would not raise any competition concerns in any possible alternative
     geographic markets.
     Assessment
     Horizontal overlaps
20. The proposed transaction will lead to overlaps in the parties' activities for the provision of
     non-life insurance products and roadside assistance services.
     Non-life insurance
21. As regards the insurance market, the parties’ activities only overlap in the non-life
     insurance segment in the UK. According to the parties’ estimates, in the UK Aviva’s
     market share in the non-life insurance market is estimated to be around [5-15%]. RAC’s
     market share is below [5%] (around [<5%]), all attributed to the underwriting of legal
     expenses insurance, a segment where Aviva is not present. In the distribution of non-life
     insurance by third parties in the UK, Aviva’s market share is estimated to be below [5%]
     whilst RAC’s market share is estimated to be below [5%]. Given the parties’ limited
     combined market share irrespective of market definition, the proposed transaction does not
     raise any competition concerns regarding non-life insurance products.
     Roadside assistance services
22. In the UK, Aviva (through NU) provides contracted roadside assistance services on the
     basis of […]8 relationship with RAC under which RAC provides the underlying
     services that NU sells under the “NU Rescue” brand, without any mention of RAC as a
7  Corporate customers mainly comprises vehicle fleet owners, car manufacturers, larger retailers and
   insurers who buy the services in bulk and either resell these services to their own customers or pass on the
   benefit to individual employees or customers.
8  Deleted business secrets.
                                                          4

    service provider. NU Rescue is sold by NU both as a stand-alone product or bundled
    with NU’s insurance products. The parties combined market share for the overall
    roadside assistance services market is below 25%. In the segment for services to
    consumer end users, the combined market share is below 15%.
23. The only market where the parties have a significant market share is in the segment for
    services to corporate customers where RAC has a market share of [30-40%]. This
    market share includes NU contracts won in competition with other motor insurance
    providers where the roadside assistance part of the policy is provided by RAC
    (representing [<5%] of the segment). The parties argue that the transaction will not
    create any competitive concern given that RAC faces strong competition from
    companies such as AA ([30-40%]), Mondial ([10-20%]) and Green Flag ([0-10%]) as
    well as from recent entrants such as Europ Assistance ([0-10%]). Further, NU does not
    sell standalone services to corporate customers but only services bundled with motor
    insurance where NU competes for the motor insurance contract and not for the
    provision of roadside assistance services.
24. The answers to the market investigation have confirmed the parties’ view of the current
    situation of competition in the market. Most of RAC's competitors consider the market
    to be "healthy" and "competitive". The market investigation has also confirmed that
    there have been new entries into the market (e.g. NCI Vehicle Rescue). Moreover, it is
    generally considered that further entry will take place.
25. In Ireland, RAC’s leading competitors are Ireland Assist and AA with market shares
    of around [50-60%] and [20-30%] respectively in the overall contracted roadside
    assistance market. According to information provided by the parties, their combined
    market share would not exceed 25% in any possible market segmentation. RAC’s
    market share in the overall market is well below 15% (around [0-10%]). As far as the
    consumer end user segment is concerned, RAC's market share is [0-10%] whilst it has
    a lower market share ([0-10%]) in the corporate segment. Aviva is active in Ireland
    through its subsidiary Hibernian. However, Hibernian provides roadside assistance
    services bundled with its motor insurance contracts to corporate customers only. The
    roadside assistance element of Hibernian’s insurance is currently provided by Ireland
    Assist and not by RAC. The policies sold by Ireland Assist to Hibernian and then
    resold by Hibernian to end users bundled together with motor insurance represent
    around [10-20%] of the overall market and [10-20%] of the corporate segment. Given
    the parties’ limited presence in any possible market segmentation and that they face a
    number of significant competitors the proposed operation does not raise any
    competition concerns as regards the Irish market either.
    Vertical assessment
26. Concerns have been raised as to whether the non-insurance market, and more
    specifically the motor insurance segment, will be affected by the proposed operation
    given that Aviva will benefit from access to RAC’s customer base and could use it to
    cross sell its own insurance products to these customers. However, the information
    submitted by the parties shows that in the UK, Aviva faces strong competition in the
    motor insurance segment where Aviva’s market share is below 15% in the UK and
    below 25% in Ireland. Therefore, the risk of foreclosure is very limited. Moreover,
    some of RAC major competitors are also vertically integrated companies with
    insurance companies (e.g. Green Flag and Direct Line belongs to the Royal Bank of
                                                 5

    Scotland Group, More Th>an is owned by Royal Sun Alliance Insurance Group and
    Mondial is owned by Allianz).
VI. CONCLUSION
27. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                  For the Commission
                                                  [signed]
                                                  Neelie KROES
                                                  Member of the Commission
                                             6
