                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 18.10.2005
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2005) D/205803
   In the published version of this decision, some
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article                      PUBLIC VERSION
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are                 MERGER PROCEDURE
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information                 ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
   general description.
To the notifying party
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.3894 - Unicredito / HVB
               Notification of 13/09/2005 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
               No 139/20041
1.    On 13/09/2005, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
      pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the Merger Regulation) by
      which the undertaking Unicredito Italiano S.p.A. (“UCI”, Italy) acquires within the
      meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation control of the whole of the
      undertaking Bayerische Hypo-und Vereinsbank AG (“HVB”, Germany) by way of public
      bid announced on 12/06/2005.
2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
      operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No 139/2004 and does not raise
      serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the EEA
      Agreement.
I.    THE PARTIES
3.    UCI is an international bank based in Italy and listed on the Milan stock exchange. It
      offers a wide range of banking and financial services in several European countries,
1    OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

      including retail and corporate banking services as well as investment banking and asset
      management services.
4.    HVB is an international bank based in Germany and listed on several stock exchanges
      in Germany and in other European countries. It also offers a wide range of banking and
      financial services in several European countries, including retail and corporate banking
      services as well as investment banking and asset management services.
II.   THE OPERATION
5.    In June 2005, UCI and HVB reached an agreement for the integration of their
      respective banking businesses. Following this agreement, UCI launched on 26/08/2005
      a public exchange share-for-share offer for the whole share capital of HVB, subject to
      a minimum acceptance level of 65%. This offer will trigger two bids for the whole
      share capital of HVB’s Austrian and Polish subsidiaries Bank Austria Creditanstalt
      (“BA-CA”) and Bank BPH SA (“BPH”)2.
III. CONCENTRATION
6.    If successful, UCI’s exchange offer will allow it to acquire sole control of HVB. It
      therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Art. 3(1)(b) of the Merger
      Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
      than EUR 5 billion [UCI 20,203 EUR million and HVB 21,821 EUR million]3. Each
      of UCI and HVB have a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million [UCI
      18,930 EUR million and HVB 20,851 EUR million], but they do not achieve more than
      two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same
      Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
A.       Relevant product markets
8.    The parties consider that that there are a number of product markets relevant for the
      purpose of the assessment of the current transaction. These are retail banking,
      corporate banking, factoring, financial market services, investment banking and asset
      management. In addition, the Commission has assessed the impact the operation may
      have on payment clearing services.
       Retail banking
9.    Banking services provided to household customers include products such as deposits
      and account services (current accounts, saving accounts, cash deposits and cheque
      collection etc.); payment services including ATM services, payment card issuing,
2    HVB already holds approximately 77.5% of the shares of BA-CA and, through BA-CA, approximately 71% of the shares of BPH.
3    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice on the calculation of
     turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25).
                                                                    2

    credit transfer, direct debit, standing orders and cheques; lending (personal loans,
    consumer credit, overdraft facilities, mortgages etc.); and investment products such as
    mutual funds, pension funds and securities brokerage and custody services
    (management of custody accounts and processing of corporate actions such as dividend
    distribution). In many cases, banks are also active in distributing certain insurance
    products to their customers. The Commission has in previous decisions considered
    some of these such as deposits, lending, mortgage loans, payment transactions, credit
    card issuing, custody accounts and distribution of mutual funds as separate product
    markets4.
10. The parties submit that although technically each retail banking product is distinct and
    there is no direct substitutability between certain groups of banking products (e.g.
    loans and deposits), the division between others are less clear (e.g. deposits and mutual
    funds) and that these products are often sold as a whole.
11. As regards deposits, the parties argue that defining a distinct market for retail deposits
    might be too narrow to correctly capture the competitive situation in this part of the
    retail market. For example, if term deposits lose their attractiveness, they submit that
    retail customers would switch to invest in funds and life insurance products. Thus,
    banks are forced to benchmark the interest paid for deposits against product offers
    relating to mutual funds. The parties therefore suggest that to fully capture competitive
    interdependence in this market segment, one should consider a market segment for the
    provision of investment solutions for individual savings, which includes deposits and
    mutual funds. The parties submit that the distribution of mutual funds shares many
    characteristics with the distribution of other retail banking products because a large
    portion of the demand for mutual funds originates from retail banking customers.
    However, the distribution of mutual funds is according to the parties largely
    interconnected with other particularities of the asset management business (which is
    clearly separate from retail banking).
12. As regards lending the parties submit that the lending segment comprises all products
    which meet the customers' demand for the provision of credit, irrespective of the use,
    i.e. including mortgage loans.
13. As regards card issuing the parties submit that for the purpose of considering the
    competitive situation in the countries concerned in the present case, it can be left open
    whether debit and charge cards (also termed deferred-debit cards) must be
    distinguished from credit cards. The latter provide the possibility of rolling over all or
    part of an outstanding balance into the next invoice period subject to the payment of
    interest on the sum outstanding. Notwithstanding this specificity, the parties
    nonetheless believe that in the context of the present case certain similarities between
    credit card and other forms of payment, in particular payment cards, should be noted.
14. Irrespective of the above, the parties submit that all such segments are only product
    groups belonging to an overall retail banking market. In particular, they argue that this
    is the case because from a demand side customers generally seek a "retail banking
    package" although customers may request certain retail banking products from other
    sources. This would mean that full service suppliers, like the parties, have to match
4  See for example case n° COMP/M.2567 - Nordbanken/Postgirot, drawing on earlier cases.
                                                  3

    competitive offers for packages offered by other full service suppliers as well as the
    specific offers from specialised suppliers.
15. Virtually all customers demand a current account and all banks offer such a product.
    The investigation has confirmed that current accounts are a core product, which allows
    banks to cross-sell other products, verify credit capacity and to some extent gauge
    financial needs. However, some other products - notably mortgage loans - may play a
    role in inducing customers to switch their current account from other banks and thus
    similarly open the way to cross-selling. The type of products sought by the customer
    will depend on the need of the customer in question.
16. The Commission's investigation has shown that "full-service banks" tend to provide a
    similar package of services to household customers although smaller "niche" banks
    and, in some instances, non-bank providers specialise in certain product offerings or
    have a more limited choice of products. Some respondents have therefore agreed with
    the parties’ view that there is a wider retail banking market including a "basket" of
    products. In particular, products such as deposits, payment cards, overdrafts, personal
    loans and other services linked to the current accounts such as credit transfers, direct
    debit and cheques could be considered part of the same market. Others have, however,
    argued that the different purposes and the distinctive features of deposits, loans,
    mortgages, credit card issuing etc. mean that they should be considered distinct product
    markets. One bank may be the leader in a specific product, but have relatively low
    market shares in other retail products: typical examples are mutual funds and
    mortgages. The investigation has also shown that such products are bought and priced
    in isolation. In particular concerning mortgages, due to the size of the transaction and
    the fact that such products are bought on a more "one-off" nature, customers choose
    the supplier on the basis of price regardless of what undertaking may provide them
    with general banking services. In addition, alternative distribution channels and
    distribution intermediaries may make the conditions of competition substantially
    different for certain products.
17. For the purpose of the current decision it is, however, not necessary to conclude on the
    relevant market definition since no competition concerns arise irrespective of product
    market definition (see further below).
       Corporate banking
18. Corporate banking comprises a broad range of banking services offered to general
    corporate clients (that is to say, excluding other financial institutions). In previous
    decisions, the Commission has found that, given their specific characteristics and use,
    products such as e.g. deposits, lending (with a potential sub-segment for real-estate
    financing), payment transactions, documentary credits and international payments may
    constitute distinct product markets5. The market investigation has also underlined the
    importance of cash collection services to certain customers.
5  See for example M. 2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot.
                                                 4

19. The Commission has, in previous cases, also found that it may be appropriate to
    distinguish between services offered to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
    and large corporate customers6.
20. The parties have submitted that products for corporate clients, as with retail products
    for individual clients, cannot easily or meaningfully be split into separate relevant
    product markets. Products are usually based on the specific corporate customer's needs
    and are generally offered in connection with a corporate account. Supply to corporate
    customers is generally more tailor-made from a wider range of banking services to
    meet the client's particular need. The parties further submit that no meaningful
    distinction can be made between the supply of corporate banking services to SME on
    the one hand and large corporate customers on the other hand since products to both
    categories of customers follow the same fundamental principles and a variety of
    approaches are in fact used to segment markets, both by individual banks and in
    national statistics.
21. However, the market investigation has shown that while banks offer a package of
    services to their corporate clients, large corporate customers tend to use different banks
    for different products to ensure a competitive offer, avoid supplier lock-in and satisfy
    specific needs.
22. The market investigation into banking needs of SMEs revealed that most banks in the
    affected countries are just starting to offer special packages of products designed
    specifically for this market segment. Unlike for large corporate customers, packages
    for SMEs are not tailor-made to the specific needs of each customer. SMEs, by the
    nature of their business and size, are not on the same level of sophistication as
    corporate customers.
23. In particular, in contrast with large corporate clients, SMEs tend to use only one bank
    for all their needs. SMEs are also more likely to stay with the bank and very unlikely to
    use foreign banks. The market investigation has shown that although changing a bank
    may be inexpensive in terms of direct costs, the indirect costs associated with such a
    change can be substantial and may be sufficient to prevent SMEs from considering
    such a move even if prices rise.
24. Secondly, SMEs, due to their small assets and limited scale of activities tend to be
    viewed as higher risk clients than large corporate customers. In such an environment,
    having a good long-term relationship with a local branch manager helps many SMEs to
    obtain loans and credits. If they decide to change bank, they may lose their credit
    history and this special relationship. According to the market investigation, this is the
    principal reason deterring SMEs from changing bank in the countries concerned.
25. Unlike large corporate customers, who primarily value the portfolio of products,
    reputation or innovative products of the bank, SMEs focus essentially on prices and
    “friendliness” of a bank towards SMEs. According to the result of the market
    investigation, decisive elements for SME when choosing a bank are (i) an easy and
    speedy process for obtaining loans and credits, (ii) understanding the challenges and
    difficulties involved in starting up a small enterprise, (iii) prices and proximity of the
    local branch.
6  Notably M.2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot.
                                                  5

26. Overall, it can be said that the market for SMEs is a growing market with substantial
    prospects for further development as confirmed by the Commission’s investigation.
27. In respect of what the parties have labelled “foreign trade finance”, the Commission, in
    case M.2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot, identified separate product markets for
    international payments and documentary credits. It was left open whether letters of
    credit, collection and guarantees should be considered as one single or separate product
    markets and whether a distinction should be made between SMEs and larger corporate
    customers.
28. For the purpose of the current decision it is, however, not necessary to conclude on the
    relevant product market definition as concerns corporate banking, and in particular as
    regards the class of customers served, since no competition concerns arise irrespective
    of product market definition (see further below).
    Factoring
29. Factoring comprises the purchase of all kinds of receivables from businesses, thereby
    providing customers with added liquidity. In this respect, it includes the ongoing
    purchase of short-term trade accounts receivable by a factoring company as well as the
    individual well-directed purchase of a customer's receivables for particular refinancing
    purposes. In case n° COMP/M.1661 Crédit Lyonnais/Allianz-Euler/JV, factoring was
    distinguished from credit insurance and it was left open whether the market could be
    subdivided. In the present case, this can also be left open, since no competition
    concerns arise irrespective of product market definition.
    Financial market services
30. Financial market services are provided to institutional investors, corporate and retail
    clients who lack direct access to financial markets or otherwise value the intermediary
    services provided by a bank. Strictly speaking, this class of services consists of an offer
    of transactions to clients which may or may not require the bank in its turn to carry out
    transactions on financial markets, since in certain instances it may be able to
    internalize the transaction, that is, cross it on their own books with an opposite
    transaction of another client. Banks also intervene extensively on financial markets for
    their own purposes. A bank’s operations on financial markets, even if carried out on
    behalf of a specific client, involve it in a customer relationship vis-à-vis a trading
    platform provider rather than in the supply of services and so should be distinguished
    from its activities brokering such services for clients.
31. The Commission has previously found that services such as trading in securities and
    derivatives, foreign exchange and money market instruments can be considered part of
    financial market services. The parties submit, on the basis of supply-side
    considerations, that such segments are all part of an overall financial market services
    market. In some previous cases, however, the Commission has looked more
    specifically at primary dealing in government bonds7 and at brokerage services for
    specific asset classes as possibly separate markets8.
7  Case n° IV/M.343 - Société Générale de Belgique/Générale de Banque
8  Case n° IV/M.596 - Mitsubishi Bank/Bank of Tokyo
                                                     6

32. For the purpose of the current decision it is, however, not necessary to conclude on the
    relevant market definition since no competition concerns arise irrespective of product
    market definition.
    Investment banking
33. Investment banking includes products such as merger and acquisitions advice, initial
    public offering advice and arranging new issues of stocks and bonds. The parties
    submit that these services differ quite significantly from each other and it is not very
    likely that they are sought as a package from customers. Nevertheless, an investment
    bank or affiliate of a universal bank will offer all these services, and there is, according
    to the parties, a high degree of supply-side substitutability. Therefore, the parties
    submit that there is no need to differentiate between particular investment banking
    services in order to accurately evaluate the competitive conditions in the market.
34. For the purpose of the current decision it is not necessary to conclude on the relevant
    market definition since no competition concerns arise irrespective of product market
    definition.
    Asset management
35. Asset management concerns the provision of investment advice and often also the
    implementation of this advice. Besides specific advice to individual customers, these
    services may include the creation and managing of mutual funds which are then
    marketed on an “off-the-shelf” basis, largely to retail clients, and the provision of
    portfolio management services for institutional investors. In the latter case, the
    definition of the investment strategy will, as a rule, be based on the individual
    requirements of the customer. In most Member States, mutual funds are constituted
    under either the law of contract or under trust law and, thus, do not have legal
    personality. The parties consider that there is a market for asset management,
    including the “manufacture” of mutual funds for retail clients and of tailor-made funds
    for corporate and institutional customers, as well as portfolio management for private
    investors, pension funds and institutions. Asset management may also include the
    provision of custody services related to the assets under management.
36. For the purpose of the current decision it is not necessary to conclude on the product
    market definition since, irrespective of market definition, no competition concerns
    arise.
37. It has been suggested during the market test that there may, in some cases, exist a
    separate market within the area of custody services or asset management which
    concerns provision of depository services for mutual and pension funds. These
    services, provided to fund managers in accordance with the relevant national
    legislation, basically include custody services (e.g. collection of dividends, coupons
    etc.), settlement services and certain control functions prescribed by national law for
    the benefit of the depositor relating to the activities of the asset manager. It was argued
    by the parties that these services are part of the wider market for custody services,
    which are provided either to individual investors or to mutual and pension funds.
    However, it is not necessary to decide on the exact definition of the market as the
    transaction does not lead to competition concerns under any alternative market
    definition.
    Payment clearing services
                                                  7

38. In case COMP/M.2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot, the Commission looked into the market
     for supply of net clearing services to domestic payment systems, therein referred to as
     the supply of giro payment systems services. In the present case, a similar market can
     also be identified, which can be appropriately labelled as the market for net clearing
     systems for low-value domestic credit transfer and direct debit. This interbank market,
     which constitutes an essential input for the provision of payment services from and to
     customers of other banks, is served by a monopoly provider in Poland in which both
     UCI and BPH have a stake through their domestic subsidiaries.
39. It is, however, not necessary to conclude on the market definition in this case because
     the proposed concentration does not raise serious doubts irrespective of how the
     market is defined.
B.      Relevant geographic markets
40. The parties submit that the relevant geographic markets are either national or wider in
     scope, depending on the product in question. They consider that the retail banking market
     is still national in scope. As regards corporate banking they consider such markets at least
     national in scope, whilst some sectors have already developed a more international
     dimension. As regards financial market services, investment banking and asset
     management, such markets in the parties’ view are wider than national, possibly EU-wide
     or worldwide depending on the product in question.
41. The Commission has stated in previous cases that with regard to retail banking
     services the relevant geographic market is national in scope due to the competitive
     conditions within individual Member States and due also to the importance of a
     network of branches. With regard to corporate banking services, and particular
     services to SMEs, the Commission has generally taken the view that product segments
     will continue to be required and supplied at national level. However, some elements of
     corporate banking may have a more international dimension, in particular for large
     corporate customers9. The results of the investigation in this case have also confirmed
     this view.
42. The Commission has previously found that the geographic market for factoring may be
     national in scope. The market considered for payment clearing services in this case is
     national in scope since it concerns only domestic payments. As regard financial market
     services the Commission has found in previous decisions that the relevant geographic
     market may be either national or international in scope10. In asset management and
     investment banking there are similarly precedents for either view depending on the
     specificities of the case at hand11.
43. However, whether the relevant geographic markets are considered to be national or
     international need not be finally decided in the present case because, on the basis of the
     assessment set out below, on any of the alternative market definitions considered the
9  See for example case M.2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot.
10 National scope of some markets was found for example in M.213, M.343, M.597 and M.2158 and
   international scope in M. 596, M.642, M.983 and M.1029
11 For example M. 357; M.611; M.1043; M.1453; M.2131
                                                      8

    concentration does not create or strengthen a dominant position as a result of which
    effective competition would be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial
    part of that area.
C.      Assessment
44. The parties’ activities mainly overlap in the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic and
    Poland. They do not give rise to any affected markets in other EU member states.
    Czech Republic
45. The proposed concentration will combine the fourth and eighth largest banks in terms
    of total assets in the Czech Republic, respectively HVB Bank Czech Republic, owned
    by HVB, and Živnostenská banka, owned by UCI. The merged entity would still be the
    fourth largest bank with combined total assets as of 2004 amounting to 6,225 million
    EUR and with a total of 66 branches. The merged entity would thus remain a second-
    tier bank with a substantial gap in terms of both total assets and number of branches to
    the three first-tier banks in the Czech Republic12. Furthermore, both the first-tier banks
    and a number of second-tier banks are also owned by large foreign banking groups and
    have thus sufficient experience, expertise and financial means to compete effectively
    with the merged bank in all segments of commercial banking.
46. Both parties offer a full range of commercial bank services and are active in all regions
    of the Czech Republic. Their combined market share does not, however, exceed 15%
    in any of the identified relevant markets with the exception of a possible narrower
    market for depository services provided to mutual and pension funds.
    Depository services provided to mutual and pension funds
47. The combined market share of the parties in the market for depository services
    provided to mutual and pension funds calculated on the basis of assets under
    depository would reach around [50-60]% (Živnostenská banka [20-30]% and HVB
    Bank Czech Republic [20-30]% ). However, there are several factors relevant to this
    specific market which exclude competition concerns despite this high market share.
48. Firstly, there is only a limited number of highly sophisticated customers – asset
    managers of pension and mutual funds13. Therefore, the market shares might change
    significantly even if only one fund (in particular one of the larger funds) decided to
    change its depository bank. Indeed, the market share of HVB Bank Czech Republic in
    this market was only [0-10]% up to July 2005, when a large pension fund manager
    switched to HVB from another bank and thereby increased HVB’s market share by
    more than [15-25] percentage points. Therefore, the market share figures do not in
    themselves indicate existence of market power as they could change dramatically due
    to only a few customers switching. Finally, there are no significant barriers to
12 These first-tier banks with their total assets and number of branches in 2004 are as follows: CSOB (total
   assets 20,133 million EUR and 210 branches), Ceská sporitelna (total assets 19 054 million EUR and 664
   branches) and Komercní banka (total assets 15 110 million EUR and 335 branches).
13 According to the parties’ information, there was as of December 2004 only 11 pension funds asset
   managers and 11 mutual funds managers demanding depository services in the Czech Republic
                                                         9

    switching, whether legal, economic or practical, as is illustrated by the recent change
    of depository by one major pension fund referred to above.
49. Secondly, there are important competitors providing depository services to funds,
    including the three first-tier banks and subsidiaries of other well-known banking
    groups such as Citibank, ING or Deutsche Bank. Moreover, some of these banks
    (including all the first-tier banks), although they do not currently have significant non-
    captive activities in this market, do provide these services in-house to large fund
    managers affiliated to their groups. They would thus easily be able to offer the same
    services to third parties on a commercial basis if they wished to do so. Therefore, even
    after the merger a sufficient number of strong and experienced alternative providers of
    depository services would be available to fund managers in the event that the merged
    entity attempted to increase its prices.
50. On the basis of the above considerations, it can be concluded that the transaction does
    not lead to competition concerns in any of the possible relevant markets in the Czech
    Republic.
    Slovak Republic
51. The proposed concentration will combine the fifth and sixth largest banks in the Slovak
    market in terms of total assets, respectively HVB Bank Slovakia, owned by HVB, and
    Unibanka, owned by UCI. The merged entity would become the fourth largest bank
    with combined total assets as of end 2004 amounting to 2 908 million EUR and with in
    total 96 branches. The merged entity would thus still remain substantially behind the
    three largest banks in terms of both total assets and number of branches14. Furthermore,
    two of the three largest banks and a number of smaller banks are also owned by large
    foreign banking groups and have thus sufficient expertise, experience and financial
    means to compete effectively with the merged bank in all segments of commercial
    banking.
52. Both parties offer a full range of commercial bank services (apart from leasing services
    and some segments of investment banking) and are active in all regions of the Slovak
    Republic. Their combined market share, however, does not exceed 15% in any of the
    identified relevant markets with the exception of the possible narrower market for
    depository services provided to mutual and pension funds. However, the combined
    market share of the parties in this market would only amount to around [15-25]% and
    there will remain a number of sufficiently strong competitors (such as CSOB with an
    estimated market share amounting to [25-35]% or Istrobanka with [25-35]% ).
53. On the basis of the above, it can be concluded that the transaction does not lead to
    competition concerns in any of the possible relevant markets in the Slovak Republic.
14 These three first largest banks with their total assets and number of branches in 2004 are as follows:
   Slovenská sporitelna (total assets 6 068 million EUR and 333 branches), VUB (total assets 5 682 million
   EUR and 234 branches) and Tatra Banka (total assets 4 322 million EUR and 110 branches).
                                                        10

    Poland
54. It is in Poland that the impact of the merger is potentially greatest, since the proposed
    concentration will combine the second and third largest banks in the Polish market,
    Pekao, owned by UCI, and BPH, owned by HVB, thereby creating the leading player
    in terms of assets (21% of all banking assets) and more-or-less tied leader in terms of
    branch network. The current market leader is the majority state-owned PKO BP
    (PKO), which will remain in first place on some other measures.
55. The Polish banking market displays a fairly low degree of concentration with the 5
    leading banks accounting for around 50% of total banking assets. State participation in
    the Polish banking sector has decreased in recent years and now PKO, which was
    partially privatised in 2004, and Bank Gospodarki Zywnosciowej (BGZ) remain the
    only major banks currently controlled by the state. Alongside the privatisation of
    Polish banks, smaller private banks were taken over by foreign investors and today 8 of
    the 10 larger Polish banks are part of foreign financial services groups and more than
    60% of the equity of the large Polish banks is held by foreign investors15.
    Retail banking
56. As regards services to household customers, the proposed merger would create the
    second-largest player with an average market share of approximately 20% in the sector
    overall. PKO will remain the top retail bank with an overall market share of around
    30%. PKO will also remain the leading player on a number of individual markets such
    as deposits, loans, mortgages, and issuing of debit, charge and credit cards. As can be
    seen from the table below, post-merger the parties would become the second or third
    largest bank with market shares in the region of 16% to 26% within each of these
    segments. The parties would only become the largest player for two retail banking
    products: custody accounts ([15-25]% ) and the distribution of mutual funds ([35-45]%
    16).
15 These include KBC, ING, Citibank and Allied Bank of Scotland.
16 Value of mutual funds sold to end customers in 2004.
                                                       11

         Table 1: National market shares retail banking, percent17
Service           UCI       HVB      Combine       PKO        ING       BZ       BRE      Citibank    Others
                                         d                             WBK
Deposits        [10-20]    [5-15]    [15-25]      [25-35]   [0-10]    [0-10]   [0-10]     [0-10]      [25-35]
Loans           [5-15]     [5-15]    [15-25]      [20-30]   [0-10]    [0-10]   [0-10]     [0-10]      [40-50]
Mortgages       [5-15]     [10-20]   [20-30]      [30-40]   [0-10]    [0-10]   [0-10]     0           [25-35]
Debit and       [10-20]    [5-15]    [20-30]      [30-40]   [5-15]    [0-10]   [0-10]     [0-10]      [15-25]
charge card
issuing
Credit card     [0-10]     [10-20]   [10-20]      [10-20]   [0-10]    [5-15]   [0-10]     [20-30]     [20-30]
issuing
Custody         [10-20]    [0-10]    [15-25]      [10-20]   [0-10]    [5-15]   [0-10]     [0-10]      [35-45]
accounts
Distribution    [30-40]    [0-10]    [35-45]      [5-15]    [5-15]    [5-15]   [5-15]     [0-10]      [10-20]
of mutual
funds
57. All these markets to households are interlinked since they are all distributed through
      the same branch offices, and, where available, telephone and internet banking facilities.
      Given the significant costs attached to running a large branch network, banks also have
      great incentives to cross-sell as many different products as possible through the
      branches.
58. Competition for services such as deposits, loans, mortgages and card issuing takes
      place mainly at the distribution level. With the exception of custody services and
      mutual funds, the merged entity will become the second largest player after the market
      leader PKO (and Citibank for credit card issuing). All the other major universal banks
      are active in this area. In addition, a number of smaller commercial banks and a large
      number of cooperative banks offer a number of these services. Thus, even though the
      proposed transaction will increase the parties’ combined market shares in these
      segments, they will continue to face strong competition from PKO and others and it
      can be concluded that the proposed concentration would not raise serious doubts as to
      its compatibility with the common market. As regards custody services the parties'
      market share is not significant and, as for other retail products, they are faced with a
      number of strong competitors. Only the distribution of mutual funds requires closer
      analysis (see below).
59. A third party indicated to the Commission that Pekao has a strong position in foreign
      currency deposits. The combined entity on the basis of value of deposits at end 2004
      would have held [40-50]% of all such deposits. The Commission’s analysis has
17   Basis: for deposits, value of deposits at end 2004; for loans and mortgages, value of gross loans at end
     2004; for card issuing, by number of active cards at end 2004; for custody accounts and mutual funds,
     value of customer assets at end 2004.
                                                          12

     however shown that this share is not indicative of any particular market strength in a
     hypothetical market for such deposits. There is no obstacle for other banks to offer this
     product if it is demanded by their customers and customers could easily switch to PLN
     deposits if the parties tried to exercise market power by increasing fees or reducing
     interest rates.
60. Conversely, in respect of foreign-currency denominated mortgages, although it has a
     residual share of [0-10]% , Pekao no longer offers this product in which BPH has a
     [20-30]% share. Again, on both the supply and demand side this product can be
     considered to be substitutable, for the majority of customers, with mortgage loans
     denominated in national currency, the choice depending only on the interest rate and
     other conditions offered and the willingness of the customer to bear the foreign
     exchange risk (which typically reduces the amount that banks will be willing to lend).
     Distribution of mutual funds
61. Currently Pekao (UCI), through the Pioneer brand, is the leading player in the mutual
     funds market in Poland with a market share of around [30-40]% followed by ING
     Bank Slaski 18 ([5-15]% ), BRE Bank19 ([5-15]% ), and PKO ([5-15]% ). HVB has a
     market share of around [0-10]%, which would rank it as number 7 in this market.
     Pioneer is a wholly owned subsidiary of UCI.
62. The attractiveness of mutual funds in Poland is partly cyclical, as interest rates have
     declined in recent years whilst the domestic stock market has prospered. The market
     investigation has shown that Pekao's relatively strong position in this sector is a result
     of a deliberate early strategy chosen by the bank of encouraging its customers to
     channel their savings into mutual fund investments rather than alternative investment
     products such as treasury bonds or savings accounts.
63. The ratio of Pekao customer assets in mutual funds, at about [25-35]% of all deposits
     (the latter have declined as a result), is very high even by international standards and
     may therefore be considered at or close to saturation point. There is arguably scope
     through the merger for additional selling to BPH customers, but this is small in
     comparison to the scope that other banks have to expand the market by more
     aggressive marketing to their own customer base. PKO, for example, despite having
     [25-35]% of all retail deposits, currently has only a [5-15]% share of the mutual fund
     market, and has concluded a strategic alliance with Credit Suisse First Boston for
     distribution of the latter’s funds. The same is true of the other major banks, which all
     have their own retail network and which are mostly owned by foreign banks with
     significant expertise in this area. As the market expands, the parties’ relative share, is
     therefore likely to decline.
64. Whilst the vast majority of mutual funds are currently sold through bank branches to
     existing customers, it should also be noted that there is scope in the future for, and
     indeed already evidence of, new entry by established international fund managers with
18 ING Bank Slaski is the 5th largest bank in Poland. It is controlled by ING Bank N.V. It operates around
   330 branches. Its strength is in household and corporate deposits.
19 BRE is the 6th largest bank in Poland. It is owned by German Commerzbank AG. Its core business is
   corporate banking, investment banking and trade finance. It has a more limited retail presence with 23
   regional branches.
                                                        13

          a distribution strategy based on direct sales, selling through intermediaries
          (independent brokers), or relying on banks (such as Citibank) who sell a wide range of
          third party funds.
   65. The mutual fund industry in Poland, moreover, is very underdeveloped by EU
          standards, representing on the parties’ figures a mere 0.2% of the EU total; there is thus
          considerable scope for future growth.
   66. Overall, the Commission considers that, whilst the distribution of mutual funds may
          constitute a market the scope of which may, in addition, be national, the parties’
          combined market share as measured by the value of assets under management is not
          such as to affect the future development of the industry or allow them to raise prices.
          The principal reasons why there are no concerns are that the parties do not exercise
          sufficient power over distribution to influence the access of rival funds to the market;
          that there are no significant obstacles to entry for any of the major EU fund managers,
          many of which have already achieved significant economies of scale and brand
          recognition for their funds; and that the market retains significant growth potential.
   67. The issue of fund creation and management is addressed under asset management
          below.
          Corporate banking
   68. Similar to the retail banking market the proposed merger would give the merged entity
          a combined average market share of around [15-25]% in the corporate banking
          markets. The other main competitors have market shares of 5% to 10%.
          Table 2: National market shares corporate banking (SME percentage in brackets)20
Service                 UCI          HVB       Combined        PKO        ING           BZ       BRE        Citi    Others
                                                                                      WBK
Deposits          [5-15]           [5-15]      [15-25]       [5-15]     [5-15]      [0-10]     [0-10]    [5-15]     [35-45]
                  ([10-20])        ([5-15])    ([25-35])     ([10-20])  ([0-10])    (-)        ([0-10])  ([0-10])   ([40-50])
Loans             [10-20]          [5-15]      [20-30]       [5-15]     [0-10]      [0-10]     [0-10]    [0-10]     [35-45]
                  ([0-10])         ([0-10])    ([5-15])      ([0-10])   ([0-10])    (-)        ([0-10])  ([0-10])   ([65-75])
Real estate       [10-20]          [15-25]     [25-35]       [5-15]     [0-10]      [5-15]     [5-15]    0          [35-45]
financing
Foreign trade     [5-15]           [0-10]      [10-20]       [0-10]     [5-15]      -          [5-15]    [10-20]    [40-50]
finance
   69. The only corporate banking market in which the parties would reach a market share
          above 30% is in real estate project financing, in which they would reach a combined
          market share of [25-35]% (UCI [10-20]% and HVB [15-25]% ). However, the market
          share estimate for real estate project financing does not take into account financing in
          Poland provided by foreign banks and other foreign financial institutions. If such
          institutions were to be included their market share would, according to the parties, be
          significantly reduced.
   20   Basis: for deposits, value of deposits at end 2004; for loans and real estate financing, value of gross loans
        at end 2004; for foreign trade finance, all international payments. For the purpose of the current case,
        SMEs were defined as companies with turnover less than 10 mln PLN.
                                                               14

70. Whilst documentary credits might be considered a market in its own right, the
    Commission’s investigation suggests that the parties’ share in this market is broadly in
    line with their overall share of foreign trade financing and hence does not raise
    significant concerns.
71. The answers received from the market investigation confirm that almost all corporate
    customers consulted consider that they would continue to have a choice of banks after
    the merger and that the parties would not be able to increase prices.
72. Thus, on basis of the information at hand it does not appear that the proposed
    transaction would significantly impede effective competition for the provision of
    corporate banking services in general or for any relevant subdivision of these services.
    Factoring
73. In respect of factoring, although the parties achieve a combined share of [25-35]% of
    the overall market, they have pointed to significant differences in the type of service
    offered by Pekao and BPH. This would mean that the addition of market shares would
    be without incremental effect on competition and prices. It also needs to be borne in
    mind that this product is little used presently in Poland compared to other member
    states. There remain important alternative providers including Citibank Handlowy and
    BRE with a market share of [10-20]% each and there is potential for other banks to
    contest the market.
    Financial market services
74. In respect of securities trading, the parties will achieve a joint market share of [15-
    25]% based on the value of securities traded on the Warsaw Stock Exchange. Looking
    merely at bond trading, the parties will achieve a combined share in trading turnover
    on the Warsaw stock exchange of [35-45]% . Since, however, most bonds are held to
    maturity, this is not necessarily a good guide to the volume of brokerage business.
    Moreover, the increment due to BPH is small ([0-10]% ). The parties are also
    respectively in first and second place as regards primary government bond dealing. In
    this market, however, the strong countervailing power of the only supplier - the
    government - and the number of licensed primary dealers is sufficient to ensure that the
    combined entity will not be able to exercise market power.
75. The only other possible product market within financial market services in which the
    parties will reach above 30% is foreign exchange transactions ([30-40]% ). This,
    however, is a competitive business offered by all major banks and it does not seem
    reasonable to suppose that the parties could exercise market power here either.
    Important competitors are Citibank Handlowy with a market share of [10-20]% and
    BRE with a market share of [5-15]% .
    Investment banking
76. The parties’ combined national share of the market for initial public offerings and bond
    issuance is around [10-20]% in each case, assessed on the basis of the value of the
    instruments issued. In addition, it is likely that this market is, at least in part,
    international in scope. Therefore, the notified concentration does not raise serious
    doubts in this area.
                                                15

    Asset management
77. The parties’ share in the manufacture and management of mutual funds in Poland, on
    the basis of assets under management at end 2004, would be [35-45]% , of which [30-
    40]% is due to Pekao (UCI) and [0-10]% due to BPH. This figure reflects the share
    the parties have achieved in distribution, as discussed above, especially as relates to
    Pekao which primarily distributes its own funds. It is thus largely driven by the factors
    mentioned in respect of distribution, and likely to diminish in relative terms as other
    banks achieve greater market penetration.
78. This market might be partly national and partly international in scope. It appears that
    Polish investors currently show a strong preference for funds investing exclusively in
    Polish securities, although this is not entirely certain since figures on the distribution of
    passported UCITS funds have not been identified. This part of the market might be
    national in scope. However, Pekao’s share of exclusively Polish funds is somewhat
    lower than its overall market share - [20-30]% by value - and therefore, on this basis
    alone, does not raise substantial concerns even if combined with the integrality of
    BPH’s offering. At the international or EU level, the parties’ combined market share is
    sufficiently small that the combination will not result in any market power.
79. Figures from the parties, confirmed by independent sources, also show that there are a
    large number of Polish funds, which, however, are on average less capitalized than
    those of Pekao. Out of approximately 150 funds, about 80% will not be managed by
    the combined bank. This presence on the fund management market shows that it
    remains fully contestable and there is no reason why these competitors should not be
    able to grow their market share and compete for business on the basis of the returns
    they are able to offer. In this respect, the combination does not appear to alter the
    competitive dynamics.
80. Irrespective of the market definition, therefore, the notified transaction does not give
    rise to competition concerns in this area.
81. The parties’ presence in other asset management services, such as pension funds, is
    sufficiently low that they do not need to be considered.
82. Both parties are also active in the possible narrower market for depository services to
    pension and mutual funds. However, their combined market share in this market would
    only amount to around [15-25]% and they would face competition from other strong
    players, in particular Citibank Handlowy which currently has more than [55-65]%
    market share. Therefore, the transaction does not lead to competition concerns in this
    possible relevant market.
    Payment clearing services
83. The Commission also looked into the effects of the transaction on the ownership
    structure and incentives of the Polish National Clearing House for low-value credit
    transfers and direct debit, Krajowa Izba Rozliczeniowa (KIR). KIR is owned by a
    number of the major banks. After the merger, the parties will become the biggest
    shareholder of KIR with an ownership share of 34.44%. However, it will only have one
    representative on the supervisory board and the applicable bylaws and governance
    arrangements ensure that the parties’ combined minority stake in this firm would not
    allow them to influence its behaviour in such a way as to reinforce their joint position
    in downstream banking markets.
                                                  16

    Distribution of banking products
84. As acknowledged by the parties, distribution of many banking products to all but the
    largest corporates and institutional customers is mainly based on a branch network.
    The branch network is also the "gateway" to cross-selling a number of product
    offerings. In particular, more complex offerings such as mutual funds, loans and
    insurance and pensions are normally (at least initially) sold via branch networks rather
    than via the telephone or Internet. Even for the largest corporate customers, the branch
    network may play an important role in respect of services such as cash collection. The
    largest bank in terms of branch network is currently PKO, followed by Pekao and
    BPH21. As a result of the merger UCI and BPH would become slightly larger than
    PKO.
85. In view of this, the Commission has looked further into the distribution issues and
    determined that the combination of the branch networks of the parties will not lead to a
    significant reduction of choice in individual regions of the country. The market
    investigation has confirmed that at the level of each of the Polish voivodships
    (regions), competition from branches of all the main rival banks would remain strong.
    In addition, there are more than 600 cooperative banks serving local areas throughout
    the country.
VI. CONCLUSION
86. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                         For the Commission
                                                         (Signed)
                                                         Neelie KROES
                                                         Member of the Commission
21 PKO has 1 238 branches compared to 782 for Pekao and 465 for BPH.
                                                    17
