    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide
    turnover, calculated according to Article 5.3(a), in excess of
    5.000 million ECU. Both Deutsche Bank AG and BPL have a
    Community- wide turnover, calculated      according to Article
    5.3(a), in excess of 250 million ECU but do not achieve more
    than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover
    within one and the same Member State. The notified operation
    therefore has a Community dimension.
III.   COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
6. The retail banking sector, in which the merged entity will
    concentrate its activities can be further divided into a number
    of individual product groups including current, deposits and
    saving accounts, certificates of deposit and others for the
    depositing customer. For the borrowing customer the products
    are, among others, current and loans accounts secured in
    different ways, import-export finance, consumer finance, credit
    cards and other services.
7. The credit card market consists of issuing credit cards for
    retail customers, operating these accounts, processing of
    vouchers representing sales transactions made with credit cards
    at retail merchant outlets and carrying out all the related
    settlement work. BAI is particularly active in this business.
8. Apart from the credit card market, assessed in paragraph 11
    below, the precise delimitation of the other relevant product
    market need not to be further defined in the present case
    because even on the basis of the narrowest definition, the
    operation does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility
    with the common market.
9. From the geographic point of view, although a growing
    internationalisation of activities can be observed, the
    activities of the retail banking sector will for a certain
    period still be national in scope.
10. On the above basis and taking into consideration that BAI and
       BPL concentrate their activities in Italy, the analysis of
       the impact of the concentration can be limited to Italy. In
       that sense indicators of BAI/BPL market power are used. BAI
       ranks 37th among Italian banks by total assets while BPL
       ranks 64th.    Other indicators of the position of the new
       entity in the Italian banking services market for 1992 are
       as follows:
                            BAI      BPL    TOTAL

    Total assets            0.54%    0.26%  0.8 %
    Total deposits          0.65%    0.37%  1.02%
    Total lending           0.79%    0.33%  1.12%.
11. BAI has a network of 149 branches located throughout Italy,
       whilst BPL's 83 branches operate essentially only in the
       Como and Lecco area where BAI at present has only one
       branch. However, each of the 10 largest banks in Italy has
       over 500 branches. Thus, the increase of branch network
       will not be sufficient to create or reinforce a dominant
       position in the Italian market.
12. BAI's credit card business covers "Key Client", issued by BAI
       on behalf of other banks, and "BankAmericard" (20.32%
       market share), BankAmericard issues only Visa cards. The
       main player in the Italian credit card market is CartaSì
       (Visa and MasterCard, 47.6% market share), the credit card
       issued by SI - Servizi Interbancari, a subsidiary of the
       Banking Association and actively supported by all major
       national banks and many small banks. Other players in the
       market are American Express (11.9% market share) and Diners
       Club (4.3% market share). BPL is a minor player in this
       market (0.34% market share). The overlap is, therefore,
       very limited and the market will remain highly competitive.
13. As a result, it is not expected that the proposed concentration
       will create or strengthen a dominant position in any
       banking markets.
IV. CONCLUSION
14. For all the foregoing reasons, the proposed concentration does
       not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
       common market.
                                  *
                               *    *
    For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose
    the notified concentration and to declare it compatible with
    the common market. This decision is adopted in application of
    Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No. 4064/89.
                            For the Commission
