                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 22.11.2005
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2005) D/206277
  In the published version of this decision, some
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article                       PUBLIC VERSION
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are                   MERGER PROCEDURE
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.
                                                                 To the notifying party
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.3969 - Société Générale / Ford Lease-Business Partner
                Notification of 13 October 2005 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
                Regulation No 139/20041
1.     On 13.10.2005, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the “Merger
       Regulation”) by which the undertaking Group Société Générale (“SG”, France)
       acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation control of
       several business assets (jointly, “Ford Lease Business Partner”) ultimately owned by
       Ford Motor Company by way of purchase of assets.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the operation
       falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious doubts as to
       its compatibility with the common market and the EEA agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
3.     SG is a French full-service bank of international dimension. It has business activities in
       three main areas: retail banking, asset management and investment banking. SG has
       subsidiaries and/or branches in most Member States of the European Community. It is
       active in the fleet management services through its specialised division operation under
       the ALD name.
4.     Ford Lease Business Partner comprises business assets in the full fleet leasing and
       management product services market in Italy, Spain, Denmark, France, Germany,
       Belgium, the Netherlands and Finland. These business assets are/have been ultimately
       owned by Ford Motor Company.
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

II.  CONCENTRATION WITH A COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.   The notified operation consists in the acquisition by SG of various business assets in
     the fleet leasing and management market ultimately owned by the Ford Motor
     Company. Pursuant to separate bid proceedings organised on a country-by-country
     basis, Ford Lease Business Partner business assets have been sold to SG in Italy (April
     2004), Spain (October 2004), Denmark (December 2004), France (May 2005),
     Germany (August 2005) and Belgium (September 2005). Additionally, the parties have
     signed a letter of intent for the transfer of business assets in Finland and the
     Netherlands (10 October 2005). The Italian transaction was already notified to the
     Italian competition authority and cleared in April 2004. The French transaction was
     also already notified to the French competition authority and received clearance in
     August 2005.
6.   With these transactions SG acquires control of several business assets (constituting
     parts of the same undertaking) within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
     Regulation.
7.   According to Article 5(2) of the Merger Regulation, when several transactions for the
     acquisition of different parts of one undertaking occur in a two-year period between the
     same parties, they shall be treated as one and the same concentration arising on the
     date of the last transaction. The acquisition of the different business assets belonging to
     the Ford group should therefore be considered as a single concentration taking place in
     October 2005.
8.   This concentration has a Community dimension, as the turnover thresholds of Article
     1(2) are met. As a matter of fact, the parties have a combined worldwide turnover of
     more than €5 billion2 (€47.9 billion for SG, […] million for Ford Lease Business
     Partner), their individual Community-wide turnover exceeds €250 million ([…] billion
     for SG, […] million for Ford Lease Business Partner) and there is no Member State in
     which they achieve more than two thirds of their Community-wide turnover.
III. RELEVANT MARKETS
9.   According to the notifying party, the product market concerned by the proposed
     transaction is the overall market of full fleet leasing and management services. The
     notifying party submits that these services are typically provided to customers
     (companies and corporations) which want to outsource most of their vehicle fleet
     requirements. Full fleet management services may include inter alia purchasing and
     researching of insurance, damage repair and maintenance, fuel cards processes and
     road assistance.
10. In previous decisions the Commission has not excluded the possibility of a market
     segmentation of the full fleet leasing and management services market into (i) fleet
     services backed by an operating lease (“funded” fleet management services) and (ii)
     fleet services without an operating lease component, where client maintains ownership
     of the fleet of vehicles (“unfunded” fleet management services).3 The notifying party
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25).
3   See COMP/M.2329 Société Générale/Deufin, COMP/M. 2540 Fidis/Sei JV and COMP/M. 3029 Société
    Générale/AIHL Europe.
                                                         2

    does not agree with this further segmentation, but has provided market information for
    these two narrower markets.
11. The notifying party submits that a European-wide market for full fleet leasing and
    management services is emerging since major operators do business throughout the
    EU. It however acknowledges that due to cultural factors (e.g. language) and different
    national regulatory tax and duty environments, the market is still national in scope.
    This is in line with Commission past decisions.4
12. In the present case it is not necessary to further delineate the relevant product and
    geographic market because, irrespective of market definition, effective competition
    would not be significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of it.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
13. The present transaction gives rise to overlaps in eight national markets: France, Italy,
    Spain, Germany, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands and Belgium.
14. The parties combined market shares are below 15% in most of the national full fleet
    leasing and management services markets as well as funded and unfunded segments.
    According to the notifying party’s estimates, the present operation would affect only
    the markets for full fleet leasing and management services in France, Denmark and
    Finland. If these markets were to be further segmented distinguishing a funded and an
    unfunded segment, the concentration would affect the funded segment in Denmark and
    Finland and the unfunded segment in France.
    France
15. In France, according to the notifying party’s estimates, the parties’ combined market
    share will be 15.6% in the overall full fleet leasing and management services market
    (SG/ALD 14%, Ford Lease Business Partner 1.6%) and 30.6% in the unfunded
    segment (SG/ALD 30.5%, Ford Lease Business Partner 0.1%). The increase of market
    share resulting from the operation is therefore minimal.
16. Additionally, the French market is a highly fragmented market where the parties face
    strong competition from operators belonging to large groups such as Renault,
    Volkswagen and Daimler Chrysler (all with market shares in the unfunded segment
    above 10%). It is also worth noting that SG has decreased its market share in this
    country since 2003 where the combined entity was reported to have a market share of
    33.6% in the unfunded segment5.
17. On the basis of the foregoing, the Commission therefore considers that the present
    concentration does not raise competition concerns in France, irrespective of possible
    sub-segmentations of the market. The same conclusion was reached by the French
    competition authority which cleared the case in August 2005.6
    Denmark
4  See COMP/M. 3090 Volkswagen/FOCET/Crescent/LeasePlan/JV.
5  See Case No COMP/M. 3029 Société Générale/AIHL Europe.
6  See DGCCRF decision in case C2005-79, of 22 August 2005.
                                                   3

18. In Denmark, according to the notifying party’s estimates, the parties’ combined market
    share will slightly exceed [20-30%] in both the overall market and in the funded
    segment. In these two markets, there will be a minimal increase of market share (Ford
    Lease Business Partner has a market share of [0-5%] in both markets). Moreover, the
    parties face strong competition from major players such as Nordania Fleet
    Management ([30-40%]) and Volkswagen ([20-30%]). In addition, there are a number
    of smaller players with a market share around 5%, who might be able to further
    expand.
19. On the basis of the above, the Commission therefore considers that the present
    concentration does not raise competition concerns in Denmark, irrespective of possible
    sub-segmentations of the market.
    Finland
20. In Finland, SG/ALD has a quite strong position, with an estimated market share of [25-
    35%] On the contrary, Ford Lease Business Partner has a limited presence with a
    market share of [0-10%] in the funded segment, while is not active in the unfunded
    segment.
21. With the present operation SG is acquiring a portfolio of operating lease contracts and
    the sale of the underlying vehicles belonging to the Ford group. After the merger, the
    combined entity will continue to face significant competition from large operators
    already with an important market position, such as Volkswagen ([10-20%]) and
    Nordea ([10-20%]), and several other operators belonging to international
    conglomerates or important financial groups, such as General Electric Money ([0-
    10%]), OKO Bank ([0-10%]) and Sampo Bank ([0-10%]). These competitors would
    not encounter significant obstacles to further expand their activities and therefore
    increase their market position.
22. In this regard, it should also be noted that the full fleet leasing and management
    services market in Finland is not mature yet and it is expected to significantly expand
    in the next years. In particular, an independent market study of Datamonitor indicates
    that the Finnish market will likely “show dramatic growth” in next years7. In this
    situation, other large financial institutions, in-house finance companies of car
    manufacturers or independent specialised leasing companies may enter the market.
23. Additionally, customers are often large corporate companies which may enjoy a certain
    degree of buyer power. The market test has confirmed that the switching costs for
    customers are relatively low. Finally, it is worth noting that none of the customers
    contacted by the Commission has expressed concerns with respect to the present
    concentration.
24. On the basis of the above, the Commission therefore considers that the present
    concentration does not raise competition concerns neither in Finland.
V.  CONCLUSION
25. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
7  Datamonitor 2004 study on operation leasing.
                                                4

Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                           For the Commission
                                           Signed
                                           Neelie KROES
                                           Member of the Commission
                                       5
