                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 12.06.2006
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2006) D/203048
                                                                          PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                        MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                     ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                 To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case COMP/M.4199 – De Lage Landen / Athlon
               Notification of 3 May 2006 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No
               139/20041
I.   INTRODUCTION
  1. The Commission received on 3 May 2006 a notification of a proposed concentration
      pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (“Merger Regulation”)
      by which the undertaking De Lage Landen International B.V. (“DLL”, The Netherlands)
      belonging to the Rabobank Group (“Rabobank”, The Netherlands) acquires within the
      meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation sole control over Athlon Holding
      N.V. (“Athlon”, The Netherlands) by way of a public bid.
II. THE PARTIES
  2. DLL is an international provider of asset finance and vendor finance programmes. The
      car and commercial vehicle lease activities of DLL are concentrated in De Lage Landen
      Translease (“DLLT”), a full subsidiary of DLL, which is only active in The Netherlands.
      DLL is a wholly owned subsidiary of Rabobank, a Dutch cooperative banking
      organisation.
1 OJ L 24, 29.01.04, p.1
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

  3. Athlon is an international provider of full service operational car leasing and car body
      repair, focusing on the corporate market. Athlon is active in six countries: The
      Netherlands, Belgium, Luxemburg, France, Germany and Spain.
III. THE OPERATION
  4. DLL intends to acquire Athlon by way of a public offer for all shares. The bid is
      supported by the boards of Athlon. After completion of the transaction DLL seeks to
      integrate Athlon and DLLT into one separate car leasing division within DLL.
  5. As DLL will make a bid for all shares in Athlon, the transaction will lead to the
      acquisition of sole control within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
      Regulation.
IV.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
  6. The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of the undertakings concerned is more than
      € 5 billion (Rabobank € 25 billion, Athlon € 801 million). The aggregate Community-
      wide turnover of each of the undertakings concerned is more than € 250 million
      (Rabobank € 21 billion, Athlon € 801 million). Whilst Rabobank achieved more than
      two-thirds of its Community-wide turnover in The Netherlands in 2005, Athlon does not
      achieve more than two-thirds of its Community-wide turnover in one and the same
      Member State. The operation has therefore a Community dimension in the sense of
      Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
V. RELEVANT MARKETS
A. Relevant product markets
  7. The activities of DLL and Athlon overlap with respect to one type of car leasing, i.e. full
      fleet leasing and management services. According to the parties this constitutes the
      relevant product market.
       Full fleet leasing and management services
  8. In previous Commission decisions full fleet leasing and management services has been
      distinguished from other forms of car leasing, such as vehicle finance lease2.
  9. The main function of full fleet leasing and management services is the outsourcing of the
      vehicle fleet and its management on behalf of corporate customers with fleets.
  10. The management and advisory services provided in the context of full fleet leasing and
      management services include: advice concerning the fleet structure, services concerning
      the acquisition of the vehicles on behalf of the leasing company and miscellaneous
      services such as registration, insurance, replacement car management, maintenance
      tyres, fuel etc.. Full fleet leasing and management services can include the funding of the
      vehicle fleet but this is not necessary (see below).
2   See Cases COMP/M.3029 - Société Générale/AIHL Europe, Commission decision of 10/02/2003 and
    COMP/M.3090 - Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/LeasePlan/JV, Commission decision of 29/06/2004.
                                                     2

  11. In contrast with full fleet leasing and management services vehicle finance lease only
      concerns the funding (i.e. the financing) by the lessor to enable the lessee to purchase a
      vehicle, and does not concern any of the additional services which are characteristic for
      full fleet leasing (i.e. the outsourcing of the fleet management).
  12. In addition, full fleet leasing and management services distinguishes itself from other
      forms of leasing by the fact that it is directed at corporate customers with fleets and by
      the fact that the lessor’s activities are in most of the cases neutral to the car
      manufacturers and the brands of the vehicles managed: based on the advice of the lessor
      the customer will compose the portfolio of the fleet, which can include different brands
      and models.
  13. Overall the market investigation confirmed that full fleet car leasing and management
      services on the one hand and vehicle finance leasing products on the other hand could
      constitute two separate markets.
      Funded and unfunded
  14. In previous decisions the Commission has left open whether the market for full fleet
      leasing and management services can be split into “funded” and “unfunded” services i.e.
      between fleet management services with and without funding services3. Some customers
      may wish to maintain ownership of the fleet and therefore only contract for “unfunded”
      fleet management services, i.e. when the operating lease part of the service is not
      included, whereas others consider the funding (i.e. the car rental aspect) essential.
  15. The parties submit that the segmentation of the market for full fleet leasing and
      management services into a funded and unfunded segment is not appropriate. According
      to the parties the customer will choose from the service portfolio offered by the lessor
      those services which it, from time to time, requires for its fleet. The composition of the
      service package is therefore customer specific. As with any other service from the
      portfolio (insurance, repair and maintenance, fuel service etc.), those services requested
      may include the funding of its fleet. Even in such a case, it may be that parts of the fleet
      are funded by the lessor, while other parts may be funded by third parties or even self
      funded by the lessee. Moreover, the composition of the service package as composed by
      the lessee may be subject to changes, as its preferences may change. Furthermore, the
      parties argue that there is a high degree of supply side substitutability as most providers
      of car leasing services can offer both funded and unfunded services.
  16. The market investigation confirmed the view of the parties. Two thirds of the
      competitors and half of the customers participating in the market investigation stated
      that funded and unfunded full fleet car leasing and management services belong to the
      same product market. They consider that the main function of full fleet leasing and
      management services is the outsourcing of the vehicle fleet and its management to a
      leasing company this may or may not be backed by an operating lease component.
      Furthermore, both funded and unfunded car leasing can be offered by the same suppliers.
3   Notably in Case No COMP/M.3029 Société Générale/AIHL Europe, Commission decision of 10/02/2003.
                                                       3

      Passenger cars/ light commercial vehicles v trucks and buses
  17. According to previous Commission decisions a distinction can be made between full
      fleet leasing and management services concerning vehicles of up to 3,5t (passenger cars
      and light commercial vehicles) and vehicles of more than 3,5t (trucks and busses)4. The
      parties agree to this distinction. They refer to the fact that the customers of leasing
      services for busses and trucks have demands that differ from those of other leasing
      customers, like international services, 24-hour services and maintenance contracts based
      on price per kilometre.
      Conclusion
  18. It is not necessary to further delineate the market for full fleet leasing and management
      services since in all alternative definitions considered, effective competition is not
      significantly impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area (see further below).
B. Relevant geographic market
  19. In line with the Commission’s previous practice5, the parties submit that the market for
      full fleet leasing and management services or any segment thereof as described above, is
      at least national in scope.
  20. The national scope results amongst others from different tax and duty regimes, different
      road conditions and wear and tear market and different customer preferences. The
      parties submit however, that in recent years a number of undertakings are outsourcing
      the fleets of their corresponding subsidiaries on the basis of a more international
      strategy. Moreover, the market conditions in certain groups of countries are becoming
      increasingly similar. The parties therefore foresee a development towards European
      wide markets in the future.
  21. A large majority of participants in the market investigation agreed with a geographical
      market that is national in scope and mentioned amongst others the differences in tax
      rules as a major obstacle for a more European market.
  22. However, the definition of the relevant geographic market can be left open in this case
      since in all alternative definitions considered effective competition is not significantly
      impeded in the EEA or any substantial part of that area (see further below).
VI. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
  23. The only Member State where the activities of DLL and Athlon overlap in the field of
      full fleet leasing and management services is The Netherlands. On the Dutch market (i.e.
      the total Dutch market including funded and unfunded full fleet leasing and management
      services, including all size of vehicles) the parties have a joint market share of 17%
      (DLL 5%, Athlon 12%)6. This market share calculation is based on the number of cars
4   Case No COMP/M.2540 - FIDIS/SEI, Commission decision of 04/09/2001.
5   Case No COMP/M.3090            -Volkswagen/FOCET/Crescent/LeasePlan/JV,          Commission     decision of
    29/06/2004.
6   All references to turnover and market shares refer to the calendar year 2005 unless stated otherwise.
                                                            4

      leased. The market investigation showed that all competitors consider this to be the most
      appropriate way to express market shares, due to the fact that there is no uniform way to
      express market shares in value.
  24. Important competitors of the parties on the Dutch market are LeasePlan (21% market
      share), ING Car Lease (14%), Daimler (6%) and Arval (4%). According to the market
      investigation the remainder of the market is rather fragmented with competitors having
      market shares of less than 2%.
  25. The above figures indicate that the concentration will create a number two player on the
      Dutch market. However the market will remain highly competitive with a number of
      strong players like LeasePlan, the number one, ING, Arval and Daimler. It is expected
      that the concentration will not significantly impede competition on the Dutch market.
  26. Furthermore, market entry is relatively easy. Especially companies such as banks,
      providers of financial services, insurance companies, subsidiaries of car manufacturers
      and international independent leasing companies could without major difficulties extend
      their activities to the full fleet leasing and management services market in The
      Netherlands.
  27. On the more narrowly defined Dutch market for full fleet leasing and management
      services for funded services the only overlap between the parties exists with respect to
      vehicles of up to 3.5t, as Athlon is not active in leasing activities for vehicles of more
      than 3,5t. On this market the parties have a joint market share of 18% (DLL 6%, Athlon
      12%). The main competitors of the parties have market shares of 19% (LeasePlan), 16%
      (ING Car Lease) 5% (Arval) and 3% (Daimler).
  28. On the unfunded market for vehicles of up to 3.5t the parties have a joint estimated
      market share of 34% (DLL 3%, Athlon 31%). LeasePlan has a market share of 25%7, all
      other companies have a market share lower than 3%. Although the concentration results
      in a substantial joint market share it should be noted that the market share increment
      only amounts to 3%. On top of that, the unfunded segment of the market is relatively
      small (36.741 vehicles i.e. 6% of the total full fleet leasing and management market).
      Furthermore as a result of the supply side substitutability companies currently active in
      the “funded” segment could easily extend their activities to the “unfunded” segment. For
      all the above reasons it is expected that competition will not significantly be impeded.
      This conclusion is confirmed by the outcome of the market investigation.
  29. As Athlon and DLL are neither active on the segment for unfunded leasing for vehicles
      of more than 3,5t this is not an affected market.
7   It should be noted that LeasePlan estimates its own market share significantly higher and, in its own view,
    would be market leader in this segment also.
                                                         5

VII. CONCLUSION
 30. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and
     to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
     decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
     139/2004.
                                                    For the Commission
                                                    (Signed)
                                                    Joaquin ALMUNIA
                                                    Member of the Commission
                                                 6
