                      COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 29-IX-2006
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2006) D/205460
  In the published version of this decision, some
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article                       PUBLIC VERSION
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information                      MERGER PROCEDURE
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.
                                                                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                   To the notifying party
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:      Case No COMP/M.4316- Atos Origin/ Banksys/ BCC
              Notification of 25.08.2006 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
              No 139/20041
1. On 25.08.2006, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
   pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (“the Merger
   Regulation”) by which the undertaking Atos Worldline S.A.S. (“AW”, France)
   controlled by Atos Origin S.A. (“AO”, France) acquires within the meaning of Article
   3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control of the whole of the undertakings Banksys
   N.V./S.A. (“Banksys”, Belgium) and Bank Card Company (“BCC”, Belgium) by way of
   purchase of shares.
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the operation
   falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation but does not raise serious doubts as to its
   compatibility with the common market and the EEA agreement.
1  OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

I.   THE PARTIES
3. AO is a France-based company which provides various information technology services
   such as consulting, systems integration and managed operations (including transaction
   processing services) to international clients across all sectors. As part of its business,
   AO processes transactions for credit and debit cards through its wholly owned
   subsidiary, named AW, which will be the vehicle for the transaction.
4. Banksys is a Belgian inter-bank company that specialises in the development and
   operation of integrated secure payment systems that facilitate financial transactions
   between consumers and merchants. Its activities cover almost the entire value chain of
   payment cards, from commercial acquiring services for the national debit card
   Bancontact/Mr Cash to transaction processing services and also include payment
   terminal-related services (sales and maintenance).
5. BCC is a Belgium-based company which mainly provides its customers with
   commercial acquiring services for international payment cards (Visa and MasterCard).
6. The parties argue that Banksys and BCC constitute a single economic unit. The shares
   of Banksys and BCC are currently owned by several Belgian banks, and in particular by
   Fortis Bank N.V. ("Fortis"), Dexia Bank België N.V. ("Dexia"), KBC Bank N.V.
   ("KBC") and ING België N.V. ("ING"), (the “Major Shareholders”) which jointly hold
   90.9% of Banksys and 86.9% of BCC's capital and voting rights. The parties submit that
   the four major shareholders jointly control the Board of Directors of both companies and
   therefore jointly control both companies.
7. Both Banksys and BCC have each a Board of Directors and the 4 major shareholder-
   banks nominate the members of the Board of the two companies. Most of BCC's board
   members are also directors in the board of Banksys, so the same representatives of the
   four major shareholders determine the strategic commercial decisions of both companies
   ensuring that in practice Banksys and BCC operate as a single economic unit. When
   exercising their voting rights within the two companies, the representatives act together
   on the basis of the principle of consensus. In addition, the parties submit that the four
   major shareholders i) have founded Banksys and BCC by means of concerted action ii)
   have common incentives to align their behaviour within both companies iii) provide a
   vital contribution to the operation of both companies and iv) necessarily cooperate
   because they need each other to make Banksys and BCC joint ventures succeed.
8. The Commission is of the opinion that BCC and Banksys form a single economic unit.
   First, the same four shareholders exercise joint control over these companies. Second,
   Banksys and BCC have for a long time been co-operating in the processing of payment
   cards. BCC depends on Banksys […]. Third, BCC receives these processing services
   […]. Fourth, BCC and Banksys share staff and infrastructure. Fifth, the parties
   submitted that BCC and Banksys are not actual or potential competitors and that that the
   two entities provide different types of services. Indeed, the market investigation showed
   that the large majority of companies surveyed are of the opinion that the pricing of
   payment card acceptance by Banksys has not constrained the pricing of payment card
   acceptance by BCC and vice versa.
9. The investigation therefore supports the parties’ and the Commission’s views that BCC
   and Banksys are one single economic entity.
                                                 2

II.     THE OPERATION
10. According to the share purchase agreement (“SPA”) signed on 19 July 2006, the major
    shareholders and a certain number of minority shareholders of Banksys and BCC
    undertook to sell their shares to AO. The major shareholders undertook to make their
    reasonable best efforts to convince the minority shareholders which have not signed the
    SPA on 19 July 2006 to join the SPA. Whatever the minority shareholders decide, AO
    will acquire sole control over Banksys/BCC.
III. CONCENTRATION
11. As AO will acquire sole control over Banksys/BCC the transaction constitutes a
    concentration within the meaning of Article 3 (1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
12. The proposed concentration has a Community dimension pursuant to Article 1 of the
    Merger Regulation because in 2005, the combined aggregate worldwide turnover of AO,
    Banksys and BCC was more than €5,000 million (AO: €5.459 million; Banksys: €301
    million; SiNSYS N.V./S.A. ("SiNSYS"): €27.1 million;2 BCC: €73 million) and the
    respective aggregate Community-wide turnover of AO and Banksys was more than €250
    million each (AO: €4.991 million and Banksys: €293 million).
13. Although Banksys and BCC achieve more than two-thirds of their respective aggregate
    Community-wide turnover in Belgium, AO is active throughout Europe and does not
    realise more than two-thirds of its Community-wide turnover in any single Member
    State.
V.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
14. In general, the overlapping activities between AO and Banksys/BCC are very limited.
    The only horizontal overlap would be on the markets for acquiring processing services
    and for issuing processing services for payment cards, which the parties consider as EU-
    wide. In addition, there exist a vertical relation between the EU market for transaction
    processing on which both AO and Banksys/BCC are active and which is upstream to the
    market for commercial acquiring services for national debit cards in Belgium on which
    Banksys/ BCC are active.
A.      RELEVANT PRODUCT MARKET
Horizontally related markets: Processing services for payment cards
15. The notifying party submits that an autonomous market for transaction processing
    services should be identified and that this market could be further subdivided into a
    market for issuing processing and a second market for acquiring processing. Processing
2   A third of this aggregate turnover of SiNSYS (€ 9,033 million) must also be allocated to Banksys
    pursuant to paragraph 40 of the Commission Notice on Calculation of turnover. SiNSYS is a joint-venture
    between Banksys and two other interbank companies Interpay Nederland N.V. and Società per I Servizi
    Bancari SpA.
                                                       3

    of payment card transactions essentially includes services of a technical nature such as
    the routing of transactions, requests for authorisations including the verification of stop
    lists (cards stolen and counterfeited), card identifications, generation of statements and
    invoicing etc.
16. The Commission previous case practice, as well as recent market research, in the
    Commission’s sector inquiry for payment cards in 2005, confirms that processing is a
    separate product market as compared to acquiring and issuing3 which are essentially
    services of a financial nature. This is also the Commission’s view in the case at hand.
17. The market investigation has confirmed that processing is a product market distinct from
    commercial acquiring and commercial issuing and it indicated that the processing
    market might be further subdivided into a product market for issuing processing and a
    second market for acquiring processing due to different product characteristics. Issuing
    processing is the issuer oriented side of processing a card transaction. It mainly includes
    the financial and technical requests for payment authorization from the issuing entity,
    maintenance of local and international blocking lists, verification of card limits,
    management of card accounts, generation of cardholder statements and invoicing.
    Acquiring processing is the merchant oriented side of processing a transaction. It
    includes the network routing of payments towards the corresponding issuing entity and
    the POS authorisation.
18. However, the question whether issuing and acquiring processing are separate product
    markets can for the purpose of the current transaction be left open since the
    concentration does not raise serious doubts as to the existence of a significant
    impediment of effective competition on any of the alternative market definitions
    considered.
Vertically related markets: commercial acquiring services for national debit cards in
Belgium
19. The parties argue that the EU market for transaction processing on which both AO and
    Banksys/BCC are active is upstream to the market for commercial acquiring services for
    national debit cards in Belgium on which Banksys/ BCC are active.
20. Commercial acquiring essentially enables merchants to accept payment cards at their
    POS (Point of Sale). Commercial acquirers sign contracts with merchants, maintain the
    merchant-customer relationship and pay merchants for their sales through cards.
21. The notifying party considers that the commercial acquiring market should be
    segmented according to the type of scheme organisation that has defined the card
    products being acquired, i.e. those defined by International Scheme organisations such
    as Visa and MasterCard (both credit and debit cards) ("International Schemes") and
    those defined by national scheme organisations ("Domestic Schemes"). Clearing and
    settlement services of international and domestic card schemes went through different
    channels, card technologies differed and as well as the product features and business
3   Commission decision COMP D.1/29.373, VISA II, of 22 November 2002, OJ L 318/25 at §§ 43-51; For
    the sector inquiry see the Preliminary Report on Retail Banking I, of 12 April 2006,
    http://ec.europa.eu/comm/competition/antitrust/others/sector_inquiries/financial_services/interim_report_
    1.pdf.
                                                         4

    rules. Based on previous case practise and due to the existence of strong price
    differentials between the acquisition of national debit cards as opposed to international
    credit and debit cards the parties’ viewpoint appears correct that these should be
    considered two distinct product markets4.
22. In     some        previous       Commission          merger       decisions       and     investigations
    (NordBanken/Postgirot and SEB/Föreninssparbanken ) the Commission indicated that
                                  5                                     6
    acquiring for the Visa and the MasterCard logo may constitute a separate relevant
    product market. In the antitrust area the Commission has identified a market for
    commercial acquiring of Visa branded payment cards in each of the EU 15 Member
    States7.
23. The market investigation showed that most market participants disagreed with the
    parties that the market should be divided according to schemes. From the supply side
    market participants argued that that international cards can be used for domestic
    payments, so the difference between domestic and international schemes may not justify
    the definition of product markets according to schemes. The ongoing creation of Single
    Euro Payments Area (SEPA)would moreover render national cards useable for cross-
    border payments like international cards. From the demand side, it was argued that
    product markets should rather be defined according to the type of card acquired (credit
    as opposed to debit cards).
     However, the question whether the commercial acquiring market should be segmented
     according to the type of scheme organisation (international / domestic) or according to
     the type of card (credit/debit) or according to the brand (VISA/VISA electron/V
     Pay/MasterCard/Maestro etc.) can be left open since the concentration does not raise
     serious doubts as to the existence of a significant impediment of effective competition
     on any of the alternative markets considered.
4   The fees of these two types of cards diverge as much as 1,5% (on average) per Visa/MasterCard
    transaction (on average) to a flat fee of 6 Eurocents per domestic debit card transaction.
5   Commission decision M.2567 of 8 November 2001, NordBanken/Postgirot.
6   Cf. Press Release in Commission investigation M 2380 SEB/Föreningssparbanken. The case was closed
    before a formal decision was taken due to the withdrawal of the merger notification.
7   Commission decision COMP D.1/29.373, VISA II, of 22 November 2002, OJ L 318/25 at §§ 43-51. The
    Commission defined two relevant product markets: one for the issuing of Visa branded payment cards and
    one for the acquiring of Visa branded payment cards. A further distinction between types of payment
    cards (credit versus debit or consumer versus commercial cards) was left open.
                                                            5

B.       RELEVANT GEOGRAPHIC MARKET
Horizontally related markets: Processing services for payment cards
24. The notifying party submits that the market for transaction processing services, whether
    issuing or acquiring processing, is Community-wide. If this was not already the case
    today, it would be so in the next few years.
25. The Commission has previously found that processing may be national in scope8. It is
    not clear that recent efforts of the cards industry to create SEPA by 2010 will affect this
    geographic market definition in the short run.
26. The market investigation indicated that the processing of international payment cards
    (issuing and acquiring processing) is increasingly becoming a pan-European market.
    The processing of national payment cards (issuing and acquiring processing) to the
    contrary remains national due to various entry barriers. In particular difficulties in
    overcoming licensing requirements of national schemes hinder processors from
    competing effectively with local processors of national cards.
27. However, the precise geographic market definition can be left open in this case since the
    concentration does not raise serious doubts as to the existence of a significant
    impediment of effective competition on any of the alternative markets considered.
Vertically related markets: commercial acquiring services for payment cards
28. The notifying party argues that the market for commercial acquiring services for cards
    of domestic schemes was national in scope while commercial acquiring for cards of
    international schemes was EU-wide.
29. Previous Commission merger investigations have indicated that the relevant geographic
    market for the acquisition of international payment cards is national9. In the antitrust
    area the Commission also found that the acquiring of international payment cards was
    national.10 The Commission’s sector inquiry in 2005 into the payment cards industry
    finally provided strong indications that the relevant markets for acquiring international
    cards and for acquiring national cards remain national due to various entry barriers.11
30. The market investigation did not provide a clear result as to whether commercial
    acquiring for cards of international schemes (be it credit or debit cards, be it VISA or
    MasterCard cards) is pan-European or national. With respect to national payment cards
8   Commission decision COMP/M.2567 - NordBanken/Postgiro, 8 November 2001, page 8. The geographic
    market was left open in the decision.
9   Commission decision M.2567 of 8 November 2001, NordBanken/Postgirot at 37. Nordbanken argued
    that the relevant geographic market for all affected product markets was national, but the issue was not
    further assessed.
10  Commission decision COMP D.1/29.373, VISA II, of 22 November 2002, OJ L 318/25 at § 53.
11  Besides the problem of adapting processing facilities to different national standards for the POS terminal
    and the host, acquirers are also expected to provide merchants with a POS terminal unless they pitch only
    for very large merchants (such as supermarkets, airlines etc. who possess terminals themselves). The
    distribution and after sales service for POS terminals involves sunk cost and may deter entrants.
                                                            6

    (typically debit cards) the investigation confirmed the parties’ view that the market for
    commercial acquiring of national cards remains national.
31. However, the precise geographic market definition can be left open in this case since the
    concentration does not raise serious doubts as to the existence of a significant
    impediment of effective competition on any of the alternative markets considered.
C. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
Horizontally related markets: Processing services for payment cards
32. After the transaction, the parties’ estimates show that the new entity will hold a market
    share of only [0-10]% on a EU wide market for acquiring processing services and of [0-
    10]% on a EU wide market for issuing processing services. If the markets are considered
    national in scope, the parties' activities would not overlap except for Italy. In Italy the
    combined market share of the parties after the transaction will, however, clearly remain
    below 15% both in issuing and acquiring processing.
33. Based on the above, it can be concluded that the concentration does not raise serious
    doubts as to the existence of a significant impediment of effective competition. on the
    market(s) for processing services for payment cards.
Vertically related markets: commercial acquiring services for credit and debit cards
34. Banksys has a market share of [90-100]% on the Belgian market for commercial
    acquiring services for national debit cards. On the Belgian market for commercial
    acquiring services for international credit and debit cards the market share of BCC is
    [75-85]%. Other competitors are Euroconex ([10-20]%), Europabank ([0-10]%) and a
    few foreign niche players ([0-10]%). On an EU-wide market for international credit and
    debit cards the parties have less than 5%. As stated above, on the upstream markets for
    acquiring/issuing processing services AO’s market share is very low at EU level and AO
    is not active on the Belgian markets for acquiring/issuing processing services.
35. Some respondents during the market investigation have expressed concerns that the
    change from joint to sole control in Banksys / BCC may strengthen the position of both
    companies in the commercial acquiring business in Belgium. One respondent argued
    that the two entities had in the past been run as different companies and merging them
    would give BCC access to data of [90-100]% of the Belgian merchant population which
    today it had not. Post-transaction the parties may be tempted to raise debit card
    commissions in order to protect high credit card commissions in the whole market. If
    one entity controlled the acquiring of credit and debit cards, then a merchant would not
    be able to do any “arbitrage” between the two payment methods. There was a danger
    that the new entity would over-incentivise credit card usage to the detriment of
    Bancontact usage.
36. However, these general concerns have to be disregarded as the market investigation did
    not reveal indications for foreclosure problems resulting from the concentration. On the
    processing market(s) the combined market share of AO and Banksys in the European
    Union is below 5% and in Belgium the strong position of Banksys already existed
    before the transaction. Prior to the transaction Banksys and BCC constituted already one
    single economic entity and Banksys already supplied processing services to BCC. On
    the down-stream commercial acquiring market(s) there will be no foreclosure problems
    either, because Banksys and BCC have acted as a single economic entity prior to the
                                                   7

    transaction and there are no indications that the actual competitors of BCC/Banksys will
    be excluded from the market due to the change to sole control. In addition, regarding the
    acquiring of national debit cards in Belgium, the entity will face potential competition
    from 1 January 2008 when the national debit card Bancontact/Mr Cash will be replaced
    by the international debit card Maestro. Then, any bank in Europe can draw a license for
    acquiring Maestro in Belgium.
37. It can therefore be concluded that the concentration will not lead to any foreclosure and
    will not raise serious doubts as to the existence of a significant impediment of effective
    competition on the market(s) for commercial acquiring services.
VI. CONCLUSION
38. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
    139/2004.
                                                       For the Commission
                                                       (signed)
                                                       Neelie KROES
                                                       Member of the Commission
                                                   8
