                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 27.5.1994
                                                              PUBLIC VERSION
                                                              MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                              ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                            Registered with advice of delivery
                                                            To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.433 - ERC/NRG VICTORY
              Notification of 20.04.1994 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
       I. THE OPERATION
1.     The above operation concerns the acquisition by Employers Reassurance Limited
       (ERAL) of part of NRG Victory Reinsurance Limited (Victory). ERAL will acquire
       Victory's UK based life, health and disability reinsurance business. ERAL will also
       acquire certain assets and employees of NRG Victory Management Service Limited
       (Victory Services), which provides management and administrative services to Victory.
       Besides, ERAL will acquire from Victory Service NRG Victory Life & Health Services
       Limited (Victory Life & Health) which conducts a life and health disability consultancy
       service in association with Victory's UK long-term reinsurance business. Under the sale
       and purchase agreement, the life reinsurance business of Victory's Singapore branch is to
       be acquired by Nordisk Reinsurance Company (Nordisk).
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                              2
2. After examination of the notification the Commission has concluded that the proposed
   operation falls within the scope of Council regulation No 4064/89 and does not rise
   serious doubts as to the compatibility with the common market and the EEA agreement.
   II. THE PARTIES
3. ERAL's principal activity is the transaction of long term-term reinsurance business
   including reinsurance of life, annuity and permanent health business. ERAL is a wholly
   owned subsidiary of Employers Re Corporation (UK) Limited, a company ultimately
   owned by General Electric Company (GE). GE is a large and diversified US-based
   company.
   Nordisk - also ultimately owned by GE - is a Danish company active in the field of
   reinsurance.
4. Victory is active in all branches of reinsurance business; Both Victory and Victory
   Services are subsidiaries of NRG Victory Holdings Limited, a holding company
   incorporated in England which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of NRG Holding. The
   ultimate parent company of NRG Holding is the Duch banking and insurance
   conglomerate, Internationale-Nederlanden Groep NV.
   III. COMMUNITY/EEA DIMENSION
5. The concentration has a Community dimension. The GE group on its own has worldwide
   turnover in excess of ECU 5,000 million; a community-wide turnover in excess of ECU
   250 million; and GE does not achieve more than two-thirds of its community-wide
   turnover in any Member State. The community-wide turnover of the acquired business
   calculated in accordance with Art. 5.3(b) of the Merger Regulation also exceeds ECU 250
   million.
6. The operation is not an EEA "cooperation" case. The combined turnover of the
   undertakings concerned in the territory of the EFTA States does not equal 25% or more of
   their total turnover in the EEA territory. Only GE has turnover exceeding ECU 250
   million in the territory of the EFTA States.
   IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET AND WITH THE
   FUNCTIONING OF THE EEA AGREEMENT
7. The business of reinsurance represents a specialist form of insurance. The purpose of
   reinsurance is to spread the risks between insurers. The reinsurer accepts either the whole
   or part of the risk insured by another insurer and thereby provides the primary insurer with
   the ability to increase the amount of insurance underwritten, and to diversify risk over
   time and geographic area. Thus, the reinsurance product is traded between industry
   specialists; it is written only with other insurance companies, no premium income is
   derived from reinsurance sales to the public, and no channels for retail distribution are
   therefore required. Accordingly, the reinsurance business must be considered distinct from
   direct insurance.

                                                 3
8.  The sector involved is the life (including health and disability) reinsurance business. The
    acquisition also includes Victory's business of reinsurance of UK single premium
    guaranteed bonds (SPGB). SPGB's are of three types, namely guaranteed income bonds,
    guaranteed growth bonds and guaranteed equity bonds. All three types are investments of
    one to five year duration but differ regarding the way of repayment. Each type of bond
    includes a small life insurance element (usually the repayment of 101% of the premium
    upon death during the term of the bond.)
9.  According to the notifying party, reinsurance in general (or more narrowly life including
    health and disability) should be regarded as the relevant product market. As to the SPGB
    business, it is argued that reinsurance of these products should be regarded as part of the
    overall reinsurance or life reinsurance market.
10. However, the question of product market definition can be left open here since even a
    very narrow product market definition will not give rise to competition problems.
11. According to ERAL reinsurance is a worldwide market, and figures provided by the
    company makes it probable that reinsurance is an international business. In this context
    the parties emphasize, that since no products are sold to the public but traded between
    industry specialists, the controls by national authorities over the conduct of pure
    reinsurance tend to be much less extensive than in direct insurance.
12. As to the SPGB's the market for these products are UK based because they are driven by
    the UK tax régime. However the market for reinsurance of these products appears to be a
    wider one, according to the parties; many non-UK based reinsurers as well as UK-licensed
    pure reinsurers are currently active in this area, including for example Cologne Re,
    Frankona and Gerling (each of Germany) and Woolwich Life (a UK-based direct writer of
    life insurance).
13. In view of the above mentioned factors, the geographic scope of reinsurance must be
    considered as international or even worldwide in scope.
14. According to the figures provided by the notifying party, the GE group's share of the
    worldwide reinsurance business (both life and non-life) after the acquisition will not
    exceed [ ](1). Considering life reinsurance (life, health and disability) only, the share of the
    GE Group after the acquisition will not exceed [ ](1) on a worldwide basis. It is not likely
    that a further distinction of this reinsurance business into separate markets for life, health
    and disability would give rise to any competition problems considering that the markets
    are international or worldwide in scope.
15. The SPGB premiums written by GE and the acquired business are included in the above
    mentioned figures. Considering the SPGB business separately GE's and Victory's
    combined shares in 1993 do not exceed [ ](1). The parties shares have fluctuated over the
    past three years and have declined because guaranteed income and growth bonds have
    become less attractive in the last years as UK interest rates have declined. Moreover,
    according to the parties, there is a significant likelihood that the SPGB-business will cease
    because of changes to the UK tax system.
(1)
       Business secret : less than 5%.
(2)
       Business secret : less than 5%.
(3)
       Business secret : less than 15%.

                                               4
16. There are a large number of financially strong competitors (both pure reinsures and direct
    insurers) in the global reinsurance market, of which both Munich Re and Swiss Re write
    significantly larger volumes of reinsurance than the GE group. Furthermore, the customers
    of reinsurance are generally specialists from large insurance companies who are able to
    take care of their own interests.
17. In conclusion, in view of the above, the proposed concentration does not raise serious
    doubts as to its compatibility with the common market.
    V. ANCILLARY RESTRAINT
18. NRG agrees on its behalf and on behalf of its present or future subsidiaries not to compete
    with the acquired business or to solicit former customers of the vendor in connection with
    the acquired business for a period of three years from completion. As this provision is
    aimed to guarantee the transfer to the acquirer of the full value of the assets transferred it
    shall be considered as directly related and necessary to the concentration.
    For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
    agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                       For the Commission,
