                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                             Brussels, 30/01/2007
                                                                             SG-Greffe(2007) D/200404
                                                                                     PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                                 MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                            ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
   To the Notifying Party
   Dear Sir/Madam,
   Subject:      Case No. COMP/M.4484 – Danske Bank / Sampo Bank
                 Notification of 15.12.2006 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                 No 139/20041
   I.      INTRODUCTION
1.    On 15 December 2006, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
      concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by which the
      undertaking Danske Bank A/S ("Danske Bank", Denmark) acquires within the meaning
      of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control of the whole of the undertaking
      Sampo Bank plc ("Sampo Bank", Finland) by way of a purchase of shares.
2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
      operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (“the Merger
      Regulation”) and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
      market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
   1       OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
   Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

   II. THE PARTIES
3.     Danske Bank is a financial services company listed on the Copenhagen Stock Exchange.
       The company is active in retail and wholesale banking, insurance, mortgage finance, asset
       management, brokerage, real estate and leasing services. Danske Bank is the largest bank
       in Denmark with operations also in other Scandinavian countries.
4.     Sampo Bank is a fully-owned subsidiary of Sampo plc ("Sampo", Finland), an insurance
       company. Sampo Bank is active in the provision of banking and investment services to
       retail, corporate and institutional customers. The company is principally active in Finland
       but also offers retail and corporate banking services via subsidiaries in Estonia, Latvia and
       Lithuania and via a branch office located in Sweden.
   III. THE OPERATION
5.     According to a Share Purchase Agreement concluded by Danske Bank and Sampo,
       Danske Bank will acquire from Sampo, all shares in Sampo Bank and certain minority
       interests in Sampo Bank's subsidiaries. Danske Bank will gain full ownership of the
       banking, mutual fund management, asset management, securities brokerage, corporate
       finance, private equity and real estate agency operations of Sampo Bank and its
       subsidiaries.
   IV. CONCENTRATION
6.     Danske Bank intends to buy all shares in Sampo Bank. The notified operation therefore
       concerns the acquisition of sole control of Sampo Bank by Danske Bank.
7.     The Commission concludes that the proposed transaction constitutes a concentration
       within the meaning of Article 3(1) of the Merger Regulation.
   V. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8.     The parties have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover exceeding € 5 billion
       (Danske Bank €15.5 billion, Sampo Bank €1.1 billion) and each of the parties'
       Community-wide turnover is larger than € 250 million (Danske Bank €14.2 billion,
       Sampo Bank €1.1 billion). None of the undertakings concerned achieve more than two-
       thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member
       State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension pursuant to Article
       1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
    VI. RELEVANT MARKETS
                      A.     RELEVANT PRODUCT MARKETS
9.     In previous decisions, the Commission has distinguished between the markets for retail
       banking, corporate banking and financial market services with possible further
       segmentation.2 The Commission has previously considered that corporate banking
   2  See e.g. cases M.3894 – Unicredito/HVB and M.2567 – Nordbanken/Postgirot.
                                                      2

     services could possibly be divided further into separate product markets for the provision
     of deposits, loans (with a potential sub-segment for real estate financing) and foreign trade
     finance. The Commission has also held that it may be appropriate to distinguish between
     corporate banking services offered to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and
     large corporate customers.3
10.  The majority of the respondents to the Commission's market investigation agreed with the
     distinctions made in previous decisions.
11.  In the present case it is not necessary for the Commission to delineate exactly the scope of
     the relevant product markets, since the transaction does not lead to competition concerns
     under any plausible product market definition.
                     B.     RELEVANT GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS
12.  The Commission has previously considered that the relevant markets for retail banking
     services are national in scope.4
13.  As regards corporate banking services - in particular services provided to SMEs - the
     Commission has previously taken the view that geographic markets are predominantly
     national but that certain corporate banking services have a strong international dimension,
     in particular for large corporate customers.
14.  The Commission's market investigation has confirmed the distinctions made previously
     for corporate banking services. However, most respondents have emphasised the
     predominantly international market characteristics of corporate banking services to large
     companies. Respondents have stated that the introduction of a common currency in 13
     Member States has contributed greatly to the internationalisation of these services.
15.  With respect to the markets for financial market services, the Commission found in the
     previous cases that the relevant geographic market could be either national or international
     in scope.
16.  The exact geographic scope of the relevant markets may be left open in the case at hand,
     because the transaction does not lead to competition concerns under any plausible
     definition of relevant geographic markets.
  VII.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
                     A. RETAIL BANKING SERVICES
17.  The activities of the parties do not overlap as they are active in different national markets
     (Danske Bank in Denmark, Sweden and Norway and Sampo Bank in Finland, Estonia,
     Latvia and Lithuania).
  3  For the purposes of the present decision, SMEs may be defined as companies with an annual turnover of less
     than € 50 million.
  4 See e.g. cases M.3894 – Unicredito/HVB and M.2567 – Nordbanken/Postgirot.
                                                      3

                     B. CORPORATE BANKING SERVICES
18.   The activities of the parties overlap in Finland and to a limited extent in Sweden. Since the
      transaction would have the largest impact in the Finnish market for corporate banking
      services, the Commission focused its market investigation on this market and its sub-
      segments.
                       1)      Finland
  (a)      Overall market
19. The combined market share of the parties in the overall Finnish market for corporate
      banking services market would amount to 21% (Sampo Bank 19%, Danske Bank 2%).5
20.   After the transaction, the combined entity would become the third largest corporate bank
      in Finland. Danske Bank/Sampo Bank would face competition from two larger
      competitors (Nordea, estimated market share 35%, OP Bank Group, estimated market
      share 25%) and other significant competitors (such as Svenska Handelsbanken with an
      estimated market share of 15%).
21.   Bearing in mind Sampo Bank's relatively modest market share, the very small increment
      added by Danske Bank, the presence of several large competitors as well as the response
      to the market investigation – in which the transaction was predominantly regarded as pro-
      competitive6 – the Commission concludes that the notified transaction will not
      significantly impede effective competition in a possible Finnish market for the provision
      of corporate banking services.
  (b)       Sub-segments
       Corporate banking services to SMEs
22. Danske Bank's activities with respect to SMEs in Finland are minor and limited to loans
      (market share <1%) and deposits (market share <1%). Sampo Bank's shares of these
      market segments amount to approximately 10%. It may therefore be concluded that the
      combined entity will have market shares well below 15% in all segments where overlaps
      occur. Also in this sub-segment, the merged entity would face competition from several
      large competitors, the largest being Nordea.
23.   Given Sampo Bank's limited market share, the very small increment added by Danske
      Bank in only two market segments, the presence of larger competitors as well as the
      response to the market investigation – in which the transaction was predominantly
      regarded as pro-competitive7 – the Commission concludes that the notified transaction
      will not significantly impede effective competition neither in a possible Finnish market for
  5   Market shares calculated on sales value in 2005.
  6   Most respondents stated that competition in the Finnish market for corporate customers is fierce and that
      Danske Bank's proposed acquisition of Sampo Bank is likely to increase competition further.
  7   One respondent stated that competition in a possible market for corporate banking services to SMEs could
      be more intensive. The same respondent considered it likely that the transaction would increase competition.
                                                        4

      the provision of corporate banking services to SMEs, nor in the sub-segments for the
      provision of loans and deposits respectively for SMEs.
      Corporate banking services for large customers
24.   The parties estimate their market shares in the relevant sub-segments as follows.8
      Deposits: 31% (Danske Bank 11%, Sampo Bank 20%)
      Loans: 30% (Danske Bank 5%, Sampo Bank 25%)
      Foreign trade transactions: 16% (Danske Bank 1%, Sampo Bank 15%)
25.   There are several large competitors to the merged entity providing corporate banking
      services to large customers, the largest being Nordea.
26.   The merged entity would achieve relatively large shares in two market segments, i.e.
      deposits and loans to large corporate customers where shares would be approximately
      30%. However, the presence of large competitors in these market segments and the
      outcome of the Commission's market investigation - in which the transaction was
      predominantly regarded as pro-competitive9 – indicate that there are no competitive
      concerns in these market segments. In addition, a number of companies offering a
      complete range of services to large corporate customers have entered the Finnish market
      in the last few years, e.g. Royal Bank of Scotland, Swedbank, Kauphting and GE-Money.
      Bearing these considerations in mind, the Commission concludes that the notified
      transaction will not significantly impede effective competition, neither in a possible
      Finnish market for the provision of corporate banking services to large customers, nor in
      any sub-segments of this potential market.
                        2)      Sweden
  (a)       Overall market
27. Danske Bank's total sales of corporate banking services in Sweden amounted to € 14.2
      million in 2005, whereas the activities of Sampo Bank in Sweden generated a turnover of
      € 489,000. In Sweden, Sampo Bank has 13 corporate clients, all of whom are Finnish
      companies or Swedish-based subsidiaries of Finnish companies. The parties state that the
      combined market share of the two entities in the overall Swedish market for corporate
      banking services would be well below 15%.
  (b)       Sub-segments
28. Since Sampo Bank does not offer loans, real estate financing or foreign trade financing in
      Sweden and only has negligible activities in the deposits sub-segment10, it may be
  8   Neither party provides real estate financing services for large corporate customers.
  9   Most respondents indicated that the transaction would be pro-competitive while a few stated that the impact
      on competition would be neutral. No respondent considered that a combined Danske Bank/Sampo Bank
      would be able to raise prices post-merger.
  10  Sampo Bank's turnover in Sweden was generated by payment transactions (€ 360,000 in 2005) and interest
      income (€ 129,000 in 2005).
                                                           5

     concluded that the merger would not lead to any competition concerns in any of the
     feasible sub-segments of the overall Swedish market for corporate banking services.
                    C. FINANCIAL MARKET SERVICES
29.  Since the relevant geographic market for the provision of financial market services is
     likely to be international in scope, the activities of the parties overlap. However, the
     parties' joint share of such a market would be marginal regardless of its exact geographic
     scope (e.g. the Nordic Countries, the EEA or a world-wide market).
30.  As regards a possible Nordic market, Danske Bank accounts for significant parts of the
     total turnover in bonds in Denmark (20%), Sweden (30%) and Norway (22%). However,
     Sampo Bank does not generate any turnover from the sale of bonds (neither in Denmark,
     Sweden or Norway, nor in Finland). Danske Bank also accounts for approximately 50% of
     the trade in derivatives and foreign exchange in Denmark but Sampo Bank is not active in
     these market segments either. The only market segment in which there is an overlap
     between the parties is the sale of shares in Sweden (Danske Bank's market share <1%,
     Sampo Bank 0.03%). Danske Bank is likely to account for a significant part of a possible
     Nordic market for the provision of financial market services. However, the activities of
     Sampo Bank in this field are so limited that a merger between the two entities would
     result only in a very small increment.
31.  Regardless of method of calculation, the parties' combined market share does not exceed
     1% within the EEA.
32.  The Commission concludes that the notified transaction will not significantly impede
     effective competition in the market for the provision of financial market services,
     regardless of the geographic scope of this market.
  VIII. CONCLUSION
33.  For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
     and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
     decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
     139/2004.
                                                       For the Commission
                                                       signed
                                                       Neelie KROES
                                                       Member of the Commission
                                                6
