                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                  Brussels, 06/08/2007
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article 17(2) of
                                                                  SG-Greffe(2007) D/204945
Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 concerning non-
disclosure of business secrets and other confidential                     PUBLIC VERSION
information. The omissions are shown thus […]. Where
possible the information omitted has been replaced by                  MERGER PROCEDURE
ranges of figures or a general description.                         ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                  To the notifying party
 Dear Sir/Madam,
 Subject:       Case No COMP/M.4692 - Barclays/ABN AMRO
                Notification of 02.07.2007 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
 1. On 2 July 2007, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
      pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the "Merger
      Regulation") by which the undertaking Barclays PLC ("Barclays", UK) acquires within
      the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control of the whole of the
      undertaking ABN AMRO Holding N.V. ("ABN AMRO", the Netherlands) by way of
      public bid announced on 23 April 2007.
 2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the operation
      falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious doubts as to
      its compatibility with the common market and the EEA agreement.
 I.     THE PARTIES
 3. Barclays is a global financial service provider active in retail and commercial banking,
      credit cards, investment banking, wealth management and investment management
      services. It operates over 60 countries and, within the EEA, it is predominantly active in the
      UK ([…] of its EEA 2006 turnover).
 4. ABN AMRO is an international banking group active worldwide. ABN AMRO is active in
      four principal customer segments: personal banking, private banking, business and
      commercial clients and corporate and institutional clients. In the EEA, ABN AMRO is
      predominantly active in the Netherlands ([…] of EEA 2006 turnover) and Italy ([…] of
      EEA 2006 turnover).
 1    OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
 Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

II.   THE OPERATION
5. On 23/04/2007 Barclays announced its intention to launch a public tender offer for the
    acquisition of the entire issued share capital of ABN AMRO. The offer is conditional
    upon the acquisition of at least 80% of ABN AMRO's share capital.
III. CONCENTRATION
6. As a result of this transaction, Barclays would exercise sole control over ABN AMRO. The
    proposed transaction therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article
    3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
    than EUR 5 billion2. Each of Barclays and ABN AMRO has a Community-wide
    turnover in excess of EUR 250 million, but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of
    their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The
    notified operation therefore has a Community dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the
    Merger Regulation.
V.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
A. RELEVANT MARKETS
Relevant product markets
8. The proposed concentration concerns the banking and insurance sectors in the EEA.
Banking sector
9. According to Commission past practice it is possible to divide the banking sector in at
    least three broad sub-sectors: retail banking, corporate banking and financial market
    services3. The Commission has further analysed whether each banking product and
    service within the banking sub-sectors constitute a separate market.
10. The Commission has constantly held that retail banking (i.e. banking services provided
    to households) can be further divided into a number of individual product groups. These
    groups include deposits and current accounts, lending, payment cards, mortgages and
    investment products (funds). The market investigation largely confirmed this further
    segmentation, in particular with regards to current accounts, mortgages and deposit
    accounts.
11. Corporate banking comprises a broad range of banking services offered to general
    corporate clients. The Commission has found that within this segment, products such as
    deposits, lending, payment transactions, documentary credits and international payments
    may constitute distinct product markets. The Commission has further considered
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25).
3   Case No COMP/M. 3547 Banco Santander/Abbey National.
                                                         2

    whether it could be appropriate to distinguish between services offered to SMEs and
    large corporate clients4.
12. The market investigation indicated that the sub-segmentation by product within the
    corporate banking sector was plausible. Notwithstanding that the respective views of
    respondent banks were inconclusive on whether SME products form a separate product
    market, there have been strong indications that banks have different strategies,
    distribution channels and different teams/business units dedicated to SMEs as compared
    to larger corporate clients (including from those respondents who did not view SME
    services as a separate product market).
13. Financial market services comprise services such as trading in securities and derivatives,
    foreign exchange and money market instruments. The Commission has additionally
    analysed in previous decisions the markets for investment banking (e.g. M&A advice,
    IPOs) and asset management5 identifying certain sub-segments within each category.
14. For the purpose of the present decision it is, however, not necessary to conclude on the
    relevant product market definitions in the banking sector since no competition concerns
    arise in any of the possible alternative definitions.
Insurance sector
15. In its previous decisions, the Commission has distinguished between three large
    categories of insurances: life insurance, non-life insurance and reinsurance6. This has
    been confirmed by the market investigation. It has been further suggested that life and
    non-life insurance can be divided into as many product markets as there are different
    kinds of risks covered.
16. For the purpose of the present decision it is, however, not necessary to conclude on the
    relevant product market definitions in the insurance sector since no competition
    concerns arise in any of the possible alternative definitions.
Relevant geographic markets
17. In its previous decision, the Commission has considered that with regard to retail
    banking services the relevant geographic market is national in scope due to the different
    competitive conditions within individual Member States. This has been confirmed by
    the market investigation.
18. With regard to corporate banking services, the Commission has considered the markets
    to be national in scope (especially for SMEs) but with a tendency to have a more
    international dimension for products offered to large corporate clients. The market
    investigation confirmed that the market was national in scope for SME banking, but was
    inconclusive on corporate banking as respondents expressed diverging views.
19. As regards financial market services, investment banking and asset management, the
    Commission has considered that most of these segments are international in scope, but
4   Case No COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB.
5   See Case No COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB.
6   See Case No COMP/M.4284 - AXA/Winterthur.
                                                    3

    some of them have been analysed from a national perspective.7 Despite indications from
    some respondents of these markets being wider than national, the market investigation
    has not provided conclusive evidence to definitively exclude that at least some segments
    of these markets could be considered national.
20. Finally, the Commission has considered in previous decisions that reinsurance market is
    global in scope whereas life and non-life insurance are national in scope.8 This has been
    confirmed by the market investigation.
21. In the present case, the exact geographic definition of the above markets can be left open
    since the present transaction does not raise any significant competition concerns
    irrespective of the geographic market definition.
B. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
22. According to Barclays' estimates, the proposed transaction will lead to minor horizontal
    overlaps in retail banking segments in France, Germany, Italy, UK and Spain. Barclays
    is not active in retail banking in the Netherlands and ABN AMRO is only minimally
    active in retail banking in the UK. In Italy, the parties' activities also overlap in life and
    non-life insurance. However, the parties' combined market share in any alternative
    product market definition in these national markets is below 15%.
23. The parties' activities also overlap in financial market services, investment banking and
    asset management but Barclays estimates that the combined market share of the parties
    at global, EEA and national level will be below 15% in any segment even on a narrower
    (national) market definition.
24. According to Barclays' the only affected markets by the proposed operation concern the
    corporate banking segment. The proposed transaction will lead to horizontal overlaps in
    corporate banking in France, Portugal, Spain and the UK. Barclays has no corporate
    banking activities in the Netherlands. The parties' combined market shares would be
    below 15% at EEA-level and in all these national markets except in certain segments in
    the UK.
25. In the UK, the parties' estimated combined market share would be above 15% in the
    corporate banking segment for deposit accounts (Barclays [10%-20%]% and ABN
    AMRO < [0%-10%]). Within the hypothetical SME's sub-segment, the parties'
    estimated combined market share would be above 15% in (i) current accounts (Barclays
    [15%-25%, ABN AMRO < [0%-10%]), (ii) deposit accounts (Barclays [20-30%], ABN
    AMRO < [0%-10%]) and (iii) loans (Barclays [20-30%], ABN AMRO < [0%-10%])9.
    However, in view of the modest accretion of the combined market share and the
    presence of strong competitors in these UK corporate banking segments (including
    HSBC, Lloyds TSB and RBS) the proposed concentration does not raise serious doubts
    as to the compatibility with the common market.
7   See Case No COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB and Case No COMP/M.4155 BNP Paribas/BNL.
8   See Case No COMP/M.4284 - AXA/Winterthur.
9  The Parties do not expect their market shares to be substantially different when using the threshold set in
   Commission Recommendation of 6 May 2006 concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized
   enterprises.
                                                         4

26. The market investigation has largely confirmed Barclays' market share submissions
    relating to the markets previously considered by the Commission as possible relevant
    markets. There were a few exceptions, where competitors would indicate higher market
    shares. These comprise financial market services (overall), asset management (overall)
    and investment banking (overall) in the Netherlands and retail banking and personal
    current accounts (PCAs) in the UK. However the market shares as provided by the
    respective competitors do not exceed 25% in either of these cases. Moreover, the
    increment added by ABN AMRO is below [0%-10%] for retail banking and PCAs in the
    UK, whereas the increment by Barclays is estimated to be below [0%-10%] for the other
    markets in the Netherlands.
VI. CONCLUSION
27. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
    139/2004.
                                                       For the Commission
                                                       [signed]
                                                       Joe BORG
                                                       Member of the Commission
                                                  5
