                               COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                                      Brussels, 12-IX-2007
                                                                                      SG-Greffe(2007) D/205435
      In the published version of this decision, some                                         PUBLIC VERSION
      information has been omitted pursuant to Article
      17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
      concerning non-disclosure of business secrets
      and other confidential information. The
      omissions are shown thus […]. Where possible                                       MERGER PROCEDURE
      the information omitted has been replaced by
      ranges of figures or a general description.
                                                                                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
   To the notifying parties
   Dear Sirs,
   Subject:         Case No. COMP/M.4760 – Amadeus/ Sabre/ JV
                    Notification of 07.08.2007 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                    No 139/2004
   I.        INTRODUCTION
1.     On 7 August 2007, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 ("the Merger Regulation")1,
       by which the undertakings Amadeus IT Group, S.A. ("Amadeus", Spain) and Sabre Inc.
       ("Sabre", USA) acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint
       control of a newly created company constituting a joint venture ("JV"). The name of the JV
       will be Moneydirect.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious doubts
       as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
   II. THE PARTIES
3.     Amadeus is the parent company of the Amadeus Group. The principal activity of the
       group is to provide solutions to the travel industry to manage the distribution and selling
       of travel services via its Global Distribution System ("GDS"). By using the Amadeus
       GDS, travel agents can make bookings with primarily airlines, hotel chains and car rental
       firms. In addition, Amadeus provides IT services to the airline industry (e.g. inventory
       management).
   1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1
   Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11

4.     Sabre is the principal operating company of the Sabre Group. The company has three
       primary business units, Sabre Travel Network, Travelocity and Sabre Airline Solutions.
       The Sabre Travel Network distributes travel-related services through the Sabre GDS.
       Travelocity is an online travel agency and Sabre Airline Solutions offers airlines
       passenger management services, software products and consulting services.
5.     Moneydirect will be incorporated in Ireland. The parties anticipate that Moneydirect will
       have two fully-owned subsidiaries, the existing firm Moneydirect Pty. Ltd. (incorporated
       in Australia) and a US subsidiary (still to be incorporated). Moneydirect will provide
       payment processing and clearing services for the travel industry.
   III. THE OPERATION
6.     Amadeus will contribute its existing Moneydirect business to the JV.2 Sabre's contribution
       to the JV will be financial only. Moneydirect will be jointly controlled by Amadeus and
       Sabre (each party will retain 50% of the company's share capital).3 The operation
       therefore constitutes an acquisition of joint control in accordance with Article 3(2) of the
       Merger Regulation.
7.       The JV will be set up on a lasting basis. Moneydirect will have its own dedicated
       management, financing, staff and assets. The company will provide its own services and
       deal directly with its own third party customers. Any services provided by the JV to the
       parent companies will be carried out at an "arm's length" basis. The JV will therefore be
       "full function" within the meaning of Article 3(4) of the Merger Regulation.
8.     The notified operation therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article
       3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
   IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
9.     The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of the undertakings concerned exceeds EUR
       2,500 million (Amadeus EUR 2,683 million; Sabre EUR 2,283 million; Moneydirect EUR
       1 million) and their aggregated Community-wide turnover exceeds EUR 100 million
       (Amadeus EUR […] million; Sabre EUR […] million). The parties' combined turnover
       exceeds EUR 100 million in more than three Member States (among them Germany,
       France and the UK)4 and each of the parties generate more than EUR 25 million in each of
       these three Member States.5 None of undertakings concerned generate more than two-
   2   The Australian company Moneydirect Pty. Ltd (including its New Zealand subsidiary), the Moneydirect
       proprietary software system, associated intellectual property rights and current customer agreements. The
       existing business does not operate within the EEA.
   3   The JV's board of directors will be composed of four members. Two members will be appointed by
       Amadeus and two by Sabre. The chairman will alternate between the parties and he will not have a casting
       vote. Decisions are taken by simple majority. If the board is unable to decide on a matter, it will be referred
       to the CEOs of Amadeus and Sabre for resolution. Each party has a veto right for all decisions.
   4   Germany: Amadeus EUR […] million and Sabre EUR […] million; France: Amadeus EUR […] million and
       Sabre EUR […] million; the UK: Amadeus EUR […] million and Sabre EUR […] million.
   5   See previous footnote.
                                                           2

     thirds of its turnover within one and the same Member State. It can therefore be concluded
     that the notified operation has a Community dimension pursuant to Article 1(3) of the
     Merger Regulation.
  V. RELEVANT MARKETS
                    A.     RELEVANT PRODUCT MARKET
10.  The JV will be active in the field of payment processing and clearing systems.
     Moneydirect will set up, market and commercialise a payment processing and clearing
     platform for the travel sector. Moneydirect will not initially focus on transactions
     involving traditional airlines but on transactions carried out by other travel service
     providers such as hotels and car rental firms. The company will contract with travel
     agencies and travel service providers and will then process and clear payments between
     contracting parties.6
11.  There are several competing processing and clearing platforms catering to the needs of the
     travel industry. The Bank Settlement Plan ("BSP") is operated by the International Air
     Transport Association ("IATA") which settles payments between most "legacy" airlines.7
     Payment collection from travel agencies is performed by companies such as TourFinance,
     DER and the SPS Platform. Pegasus provides hotel distribution services including
     payment systems whereas WPS manages and processes data for the travel industry,
     including payment processing. Perot Systems provides IT solutions to the travel industry
     (and other industries).
12.  Payment processing and clearing platforms are aimed at facilitating the processing of
     payments and related documentation. Their specific features vary from industry to
     industry but generally provide for pre-arranged procedures for invoicing and transfer of
     funds in an efficient and cost-effective manner.
13.  For the purposes of market definition, it may possibly be appropriate to distinguish
     between payment processing and clearing platforms active in different industries. In the
     present case it is however not necessary for the Commission to determine whether
     payment processing and clearing for the travel industry constitutes a relevant product
     market distinct from payment processing and clearing in other industries, because the
     notified the transaction does not lead to competition concerns under any plausible product
     market definition.
                    B.     RELEVANT GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS
14.  To date, Moneydirect is only active in Australia, New Zealand and the Philippines. The
     JV will offer its services to travel businesses in the EU (initially in France and the United
     Kingdom) and the USA with the view to offer payment processing and clearing globally
     in the future.
  6  Examples of such transactions would be payments from travel agent to hotel (transfer of deposit or pre-
     payment received by travel agent), from travel agent to car rental company (transfer of deposit or pre-
     payment received by travel agent) and hotel to travel agent (payment of commission).
  7  Over 80% of worldwide airline revenues are processed via IATA travel agencies in the BSP system.
                                                        3

15.   For the purposes of the present case, it is not necessary to determine the exact geographic
      scope of the relevant market(s) – for instance by defining national, EU-wide or worldwide
      markets – since the notified transaction does not lead to competition concerns under any
      plausible market definition.
  VI.     COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
                     A. NO HORIZONTAL OVERLAPS
16.   Amadeus is currently not active in payment processing and clearing in the EEA. Sabre is
      not active in payment processing and clearing at all. It may therefore be concluded that the
      notified transaction will not result in any horizontal overlaps.
                     B. NO VERTICAL CONCERNS
17.   The parent companies – i.e. the GDS businesses of Amadeus and Sabre and their
      respective travel agency businesses – are likely to become customers of the JV since they
      may disburse or receive payments to and from certain travel agents via Moneydirect.
      However, the notifying parties state that Moneydirect will have a large number of
      customers and that transactions to/from Amadeus and Sabre will account for a maximum
      of 10% of Moneydirect's total transaction volume. Travel agencies owned by Amadeus
      and Sabre account for a maximum of 6% of travel agency transactions in any Member
      State.
18.   Given these circumstances, it may be expected that the relative importance in value terms
      of the vertical relationships between Amadeus and Sabre on the one hand and
      Moneydirect on the other, will be limited.
19.   It may be concluded that no vertical relationship between Amadeus and Sabre and the JV
      will give cause for concern.
                     C. COORDINATION BETWEEN THE PARENT COMPANIES
20.   One of the parent companies of the JV, Amadeus, has very strong market positions in the
      EU markets for GDS services.8 Moreover, GDS markets are highly concentrated with only
      three providers active in the EU (Amadeus, Sabre and Galileo/Worldspan). On the
      downstream side of the two-sided GDS market – in which GDS providers offer
      reservation, booking and ticketing services to travel agencies – Amadeus has market
      shares exceeding 50% in 18 Member States and exceeding 90% in seven Member States.9
21.   Given the highly concentrated nature of the GDS market, any coordination of the
      competitive behaviour of Amadeus and Sabre in this market could be detrimental to
      competition. Certain third parties have communicated their concerns about the fact that
  8   For an in-depth description and analysis of the markets for GDS services, see the Commission decision of
      21.08.2007 in case COMP/M.4523 TRAVELPORT/WORLDSPAN (not yet published).
  9   See TRAVELPORT/WORLDSPAN, para 69. The Commission considered the downstream side of the
      market to be national in scope.
                                                        4

     Amadeus and Sabre will be cooperating in the JV.10 Their main concern is a perceived
     risk that the JV would be used as a vehicle to co-ordinate the competitive behaviour of
     Amadeus' and Sabre's GDS businesses and travel agency businesses. These third parties
     allege that data could be exchanged between the JV and the parent companies and
     ultimately between the parent companies (via the JV). Detailed data from three sources
     (Amadeus, Sabre and Moneydirect) could be combined and used to coordinate the
     behaviour of the parent companies in the GDS markets or be sold to airlines. The latter
     option would allegedly give advantages to airlines in contractual negotiations with travel
     agents. Finally, it is alleged that Amadeus and Sabre would use this information to favour
     their own retail travel agencies.11
22.  The emphasis of the Commission investigation of the notified transaction has therefore
     been to assess whether the JV has "as its object or effect the coordination of the
     competitive behaviour of undertakings that remain independent."12 There are no
     indications in the contractual arrangements between the parties included in the notification
     that would lead the Commission to believe that the objective of creating the JV is to
     coordinate the market behaviour of Amadeus and Sabre.
23.  First, it ought to be noted that the current activities of the company that will form the
     nucleus of the JV (Australian firm Moneydirect Pty. Ltd.) are very limited compared to
     the activities of the parent companies and that none of them are active in the field of
     payment transactions and clearing in the EU.13
24.  Second, the principal activity of the parent companies – the provision of GDS services – is
     not an activity which is situated upstream or downstream from the activity of the JV.
     Having access to GDS services is not a pre-requisite to be able to supply payment
     transaction and clearing services. The GDS market may be described as a neighbouring
     market in the sense that the payment transaction and clearing services provided by the JV
     will be offered to companies active in the travel industry, including GDS providers such
     as Amadeus and Sabre. However, the number of potential customers to the JV within the
     travel industry (and possibly outside it) is much wider than Amadeus and Sabre.
     Considering these circumstances, the market for GDS services cannot be considered to be
     closely related to the provision of payment transaction and clearing services.
25.  Third, the Commission has analysed closely the arrangements that will be put in place by
     Amadeus and Sabre to prevent anti-competitive information "spill-over" to and from the
     JV. The Joint Venture Agreement specifies which types of information will be shared
     between Moneydirect, Amadeus and Sabre. No information that is not normally available
     to shareholders of a JV will be disclosed by Moneydirect to its parent companies. As a
     general rule, information obtained and produced by the JV will be treated as confidential
  10 The Group of National Travel Agents' and Tour Operators' Associations within the EU ("ECTAA"), the
     Guild of European Business Travel Agents ("GEBTA") and the German Travel Association (Deutscher
     ReiseVerband, "DRV") have contacted the Commission in this respect.
  11 Amadeus and Sabre both operate on-line travel agencies.
  12 Article 2(4) of the Merger Regulation.
  13 The turnover of Moneydirect Pty. Ltd. was EUR 1 million compared to EUR 2,683 million for Amadeus and
     EUR 2,283 million for Sabre.
                                                      5

      and will not be made available to the parent companies. Amadeus' and Sabre's access to
      information will be limited to their own respective transactions.14 The parties state in the
      Joint Venture Agreement that they consider it paramount to keep confidential pricing and
      transaction information of the JV's customers. The only persons from the parent
      companies that will be granted access to detailed information about customers' payment
      transactions will be employees formally seconded to the JV that do not have any sales or
      managing function within Amadeus or Sabre.
26.   Given the very limited size of the JV in relation to the principal activities of the parent
      companies, given the fact that GDS services are not closely related to payment transaction
      and clearing services and provided that the contractual arrangements limiting information
      flows between the JV and the parent companies are put in place and strictly adhered to,
      the Commission considers it unlikely that the JV will be used as a vehicle to co-ordinate
      the competitive behaviour of Amadeus' and Sabre's GDS businesses and travel agency
      businesses.15
27.   The Commission can therefore conclude that the notified operation does not have as its
      object or likely effect to coordinate the competitive behaviour of Amadeus and Sabre in a
      market which is upstream or downstream from that of the JV or in a neighbouring market
      closely related to the market in which the JV is active.
VIII.      CONCLUSION
28.   For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
      and to declare it compatible with the common market and the EEA Agreement. This
      decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
      139/2004.
                                                                    For the Commission
                                                                        (signed)
                                                                    Neelie KROES
                                                                    Member of the Commission
  14  The provisions concerning transfer of information are included in […] of the Joint Venture Agreement
      included in the notification.
  15  Should it turn out later that the JV is used to coordinate anti-competitive market behaviour; it may of course
      be subject to ex-post investigation under the Community anti-trust rules (articles 81 and 82 of the EC
      Treaty).
                                                            6
