                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 27.09.2007
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2007) D/205768
   In the published version of this decision, some                       PUBLIC VERSION
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                      MERGER PROCEDURE
   general description.                                            ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying party:
Dear Sirs,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.4713 – Aviva/Hamilton
                Notification of 23/08/2007pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
1. On 23 August 2007, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
      pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 ("Merger Regulation")
      by which the undertaking Aviva Plc ("Aviva", UK) acquires within the meaning of
      Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control of the whole of the undertakings
      Hamilton Insurance Company Limited ("Hamilton General", UK) and Hamilton Life
      Assurance Company Limited ("Hamilton Life", UK; Hamilton General and Hamilton
      Life together: "Hamilton") by way of purchase of shares.
I.      THE PARTIES
2. Aviva, together with its subsidiaries, is active in the transacting of general insurance (non-
      life insurance) and life assurance business. Other core businesses are long term savings and
      fund management. It has activities in the UK, Ireland, continental Europe and elsewhere
      around the world. The Aviva group also invests in securities, properties, mortgages and
      loans and carries on a property trading business. Its UK insurance business is conducted
      under the Norwich Union umbrella. Aviva's insurance activities in Ireland are conducted
      through its Hibernian business.
3. The principal activity of Hamilton Life is the underwriting of life assurance business in
      the United Kingdom.
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

4. Hamilton General principally underwrites accident and health, property and general
    insurance business.
II.   THE OPERATION AND THE CONCENTRATION
5. The proposed transaction concerns the acquisition of sole control of Hamilton General
    and Hamilton Life by Aviva and will be effected by a share purchase agreement.
6. The acquisition takes place within the broader commercial context of an arrangement
    between Aviva and HSBC that will result in their forming a joint venture company for
    the marketing of HSBC branded insurance products (home and motor insurance and
    associated “add-on” products) within HSBC’s network. This transaction is not part of
    the proposed concentration.
7. There will be a reinsurance arrangement between Aviva and HSBC whereby Aviva
    group entities will, pursuant to commercial arrangements, reinsure with HSBC certain
    risks underwritten by Hamilton General. This reinsurance arrangement is not part of the
    proposed transaction either.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8. The transaction has a Community dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the Merger
    Regulation. The parties have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of €
    5,000 million (Aviva € 42,149 million, Hamilton € […] million), and at least two have a
    Community-wide turnover in excess of € 250 million (Aviva € […] million, Hamilton €
    […] million). Only Hamilton achieves more than two thirds of their Community-wide
    turnover in one member state (in the UK).
IV. RELEVANT MARKETS
9. The Transaction concerns the provision of life and non-life insurance services in the UK
    and Ireland. In previous decisions, the Commission has distinguished between the
    provision of insurance products into non-life/general insurance, life assurance and
    reinsurance. The present market investigation has also confirmed the division between
    life assurance and non-life insurance. Although the Commission has not definitively
    concluded on the matter, it has suggested that life and non-life insurance, can be divided
    into as many product markets as there are different kinds of risks covered.
10. The Commission has in a number of decisions acknowledged that there is a degree of
    supply side substitutability in the non-life insurance segment, as certain insurance
    products require a common set of skills and resources including risk management,
    administration, IT systems and technology2. From a supply side perspective the
    conditions for insurance of different types of risks are similar and most large insurance
    companies are active in multiple risk types. However, there may be a difference as
    regards the underwriting of different insurances. This suggests that there is some supply
    side substitutability between the different segments of non-life insurance therefore many
    different types of non-life insurance could be included in the same product market3.
11. This substitutability does not exist from the customer’s perspective (demand side) and
    the market could potentially be divided into as many products as there are different
2   See Case No IV/M.1142 – Commercial Union/General Accident.
3   Case No COMP/M.3035 – Berkshire Hathaway Converium/Gaum/JV; Case No COMP – M.2676
    Sampo/Varma Sampo/If Holding/JV; Case No IV/M.1142 – Commercial Union/General Accident.
                                                   2

    risks4. From the demand side, the Commission has considered that there is limited
    substitution for the insured between the different categories of policy offered5. The
    market investigation in this case has confirmed this approach; however this question can
    be left open as no competition concerns arise whichever definition is applied.
12. As regards life assurance, the Commission has found that life assurance products can in
    principle be divided into as many product markets as there are different kinds of risks
    covered6. Their characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and there is typically
    no substitutability for the consumer between the different risks insured7. As such the
    Commission has looked at the various segments of the life assurance market, including
    life assurance policies, investment policies and pensions. The Commission has not
    found it necessary however to determine conclusively whether the market should be
    subdivided accordingly. The exact product market definition can also be left open in this
    case due to the fact that the proposed concentration does not raise competition concerns
    in any alternative product market definition.
13. In past decisions8, whilst recognising that insurance markets are becoming more open to
    intra-Community competition, the Commission has held that the markets for non-life
    insurance and life assurance products are generally national in scope due to the national
    distribution channels, the established market structures, fiscal constraints and differing
    regulatory systems9. Differences in regulatory regimes and legal obligations mean that
    the conditions of competition are normally appreciably different in the various Member
    States. In addition, basic terms and conditions of the policies are determined on a
    national level and competition normally takes place on a nation-wide basis, with
    national advertising and increasingly centralised sales functions. The market
    investigation has confirmed that most market participants consider the relevant
    geographic market as national in scope. However, the definition of the relevant
    geographic market can be left open as the proposed transaction would not lead to
    concerns irrespective of market definition.
V.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
14. The parties to the proposed transaction are active in a number of non-life insurance
    areas as well as life assurance.
15. As such, the proposed transaction leads to overlaps and affected markets only for the
    parties' activities in Ireland and the United Kingdom. However, according to the
    information received from the parties, the aggregate market shares of Aviva and
    Hamilton do not exceed [17-22] % in any of the possible hypothetical product markets
    at national level. Furthermore, the maximum increment is less than [1-5] % on any
    alternative market definition. The market investigation broadly confirmed these figures.
4   Case No COMP/M.759 – Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance and Case No COMP/M.862 – AXA/UAP.
5   Case No COMP/M.3035 – Berkshire Hathaway Converium/Gaum/JV.
6   Case No COMP/M.2676 – Sampo/Varma Sampo/If Holding/JV.
7   Case No COMP/M.862 – AXA/UAP.
8   See, for example, Cases No COMP/M.759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance and COMP/M.2225 -
    Fortis/ASR.
9   Whilst not relevant to the markets in the present transaction, the Commission has indicated that some
    differences in the geographic scope of different types of non-life/general insurance may exist (e.g. in
    relation to transport liability and marine, aviation and transport (MAT) insurance for large corporate
    customers and large risk respectively): see Case No COMP/M.3395 - Sampo/If Skadeförsäkring and Case
    No COMP/M.2676 - Sampo/Sampo-Varma/If Holding/JV.
                                                          3

16. In Ireland the proposed concentration would lead to affected markets only on the basis
    of a hypothetical overall non-life insurance market for which the parties estimate their
    combined market share to about [15-20] %, and for life assurance overall with an
    estimated combined market share of about [14-19] %. The data provided by the
    competitors in the course of the market investigation confirmed these figures. The
    increment to Aviva's market share is minor, less than [1-5] % in either segment. The
    parties did not identify any affected market on a more narrow subdivision of the
    markets.
17. In the United Kingdom the proposed concentration would not lead to affected markets
    on an overall non-life insurance markets or life assurance market but the parties
    identified two affected markets on the basis of a national market for home insurance,
    with an estimated combined market share of about [17-22] % and for creditor insurance,
    with an estimated combined market share of about [17-22] %. These figures were also
    confirmed by the market investigation. The increment to Aviva's market share is also
    here minor; for home insurance less than [1-5] % and for creditor insurance less than [1-
    5] %.
18. There are some vertical relationships between the activities of the parties. In particular,
    Aviva is present in the market of selling insurance products through its Norwich Union
    Direct and RAC channels in the UK and through Hibernian Direct in Ireland. However
    irrespective of market definition there would be no affected markets within the meaning
    of Form CO.
19. The Commission's investigation has confirmed that the proposed transaction would have
    limited impacts on the markets involved by the proposed transaction and that it would
    not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market.
VI. CONCLUSION
20. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
    139/2004.
                                                        For the Commission
                                                        signed
                                                        Vladimir Špidla
                                                        Member of the Commission
                                                   4
