                           COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 19-9-2009
   In the published version of this decision, some               SG-Greffe(2007) 205559
   information has been omitted pursuant to
   Article 17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No
   139/2004 concerning non-disclosure of business
                                                                         PUBLIC VERSION
   secrets and other confidential information. The
   omissions are shown thus […]. Where possible
   the information omitted has been replaced by                       MERGER PROCEDURE
   ranges of figures or a general description.
                                                                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying party/ies
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:         Case No COMP/M.4843 - RBS/ ABN AMRO ASSETS
                 Notification of 14.08.2007 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                 No 139/20041
       1. On 14 August 2007, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
            concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the
            "Merger Regulation") by which the undertaking Royal Bank of Scotland Plc
            ("RBS", UK) acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council
            Regulation control of parts of ABN AMRO Holding N.V. ("ABN AMRO assets",
            The Netherlands) by way of public bid announced on 29 May 2007.
       2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
            operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
            doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the EEA agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
       3. RBS is the holding company of one of the world's largest banking and financial
            services groups, listed on the London Stock Exchange and headquartered in Edinburgh.
            RBS operates through two principal subsidiaries, the royal Bank of Scotland and
            NatWest. RBS's business divisions include: Corporate Markets (comprising Global &
            Banking markets and UK Corporate Banking), Retail markets (comprising Retail and
            Wealth Management), Ulster Bank Group, Citizens Financial Group, RBS insurance
            and Manufacturing.
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

     4. ABN AMRO is the ultimate parent entity of an international bank, active in 53
         countries. ABN AMRO is active in four principal customer segments: Personal
         Banking, Private Banking, Business and Commercial Clients and Corporate and
         Institutional Clients. ABN AMRO is predominantly active in the Netherlands.
II.  THE OPERATION
     5. On 29/05/2007 a Consortium formed by the banks RBS, Santander and Fortis
         announced its intention to launch a public tender offer for the acquisition of the
         entire issued share capital of ABN AMRO. The offer is conditional upon the
         acquisition of at least 80% of ABN AMRO's share capital.
     6. If the bid of the Consortium is successful, it will lead to the break-up of ABN
         AMRO. The present notification relates to RBS’ acquisition of the following assets of
         ABN AMRO ("ABN AMRO assets"):
         – Business unit North America;
         – Business unit Global Clients and wholesale clients in the Netherlands (including
            former Dutch wholesale clients) and in Latin America (excluding Brazil);
         – Business unit Asia;
         – Business unit Europe (excluding Antonveneta).
     7. RBS will also acquire the following assets, which will nevertheless be held for sale
         upon completion of the transaction:
         – Head office and central functions;
         – Private equity portfolio (Business unit private equity);
         – Stakes in Capitalia SpA Roma, Saudi Hollandi Bank Riyadh, and Prime Bank
            Pakistan.
     8. The acquisition of the remaining assets of ABN AMRO has been notified separately as
         Case No. COMP/M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO assets and Case No. COMP/M.4845 -
         Santander/ABN AMRO assets.
     9. Pursuant to paragraph 30 of the Commission Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice
         under the Merger Regulation, the overall Consortium's operation is considered to
         give rise to three different concentrations. In particular, on 29 May 2007 the
         Consortium members have entered into a binding agreement to split up the assets of
         ABN AMRO among them within a sufficiently short time frame.
III. CONCENTRATION
     10. As a result of this transaction, RBS would exercise sole control over ABN AMRO
         assets. The proposed transaction therefore constitutes a concentration within the
         meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
                                                  2

IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
    11. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
        more than EUR 5 billion2. Each of RBS and ABN AMRO assets has a Community-
        wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million, but they do not achieve more than
        two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same
        Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension
        pursuant to Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
V.  COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
A. RELEVANT MARKETS
Relevant product markets
    12. The proposed concentration concerns the banking sector in the EEA.
Banking sector
    13. According to Commission past practice it is possible to divide the banking sector in
        at least three broad sub-sectors: retail banking, corporate banking and financial
        market services3. The Commission has further analysed whether each banking
        product and service within the banking sub-sectors constitutes a separate market.
    14. The Commission has constantly held that retail banking (i.e. banking services
        provided to households) can be further divided into a number of individual product
        groups. These groups include deposits and current accounts, lending, payment
        cards, mortgages and investment products (funds).
    15. Corporate banking comprises a broad range of banking services offered to
        corporate clients. The Commission has found that within this segment, products
        such as deposits, lending, payment transactions, documentary credits and
        international payments may constitute distinct product markets. The Commission
        has further considered whether it could be appropriate to distinguish between
        services offered to SMEs and large corporate clients4.
    16. The notifying party does not oppose to a division of the relevant product market
        between SMEs and larger corporate clients. Moreover, the notifying party considers
        that the market for banking services to large corporate clients could be sub-divided
        into the following products: loans, transaction banking (domestic cash management
        and international cash management), trade finance (e.g. documentary credits) and
        structured financing (project finance, asset finance and real estate finance).
    17. In previous Commission decisions factoring has been defined as comprising the
        purchase of all kinds of receivables from businesses, thereby providing customers
        with added liquidity. In this respect, it includes the ongoing purchase of short-term
2  Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
   on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25).
3  Case No COMP/M. 3547 Banco Santander/Abbey National.
4  Case No COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB.
                                                        3

        trade accounts receivable by a factoring company as well as the individual well-
        directed purchase of a customer’s receivables for particular refinancing purposes.5
    18. Financial market services comprise services such as trading in securities and
        derivatives, foreign exchange and money market instruments.
    19. The Commission has additionally analysed in previous decisions the markets for
        investment banking (e.g. M&A advice, IPOs)6 identifying certain sub-segments
        within each categories.
    20. For the purpose of the present decision it is, however, not necessary to conclude on
        the relevant product market definitions in the banking sector since no competition
        concerns arise in any of the possible alternative definitions.
Relevant geographic markets
    21. In its previous decisions, the Commission has considered that with regard to retail
        banking services the relevant geographic market is national in scope due to the
        different competitive conditions within individual Member States.
    22. With regard to corporate banking services, the Commission has considered the
        markets to be national in scope (especially for SMEs) but with a tendency to have a
        more international dimension for products offered to large corporate clients.
        Factoring has been considered national in scope.
    23. As regards financial market services and investment banking, the Commission has
        considered that most of these segments are international in scope, but some of them
        have been analysed from a national perspective7.
    24. In the present case, the exact geographic definition of the above markets can be left
        open since the present transaction does not raise any significant competition
        concerns irrespective of the geographic market definition.
B. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
    25. According to RBS, the proposed transaction will not lead to any overlaps in retail
        banking and insurance segments between RBS and ABN AMRO assets' activities in
        the EEA. The parties' activities however overlap in corporate banking, factoring,
        financial market services and investment banking, although to a very limited extent.
    26. According to RBS, the parties' combined market shares relating to corporate
        banking would be below 15% at EEA and national level except in the UK. In the
        UK, the parties' combined market share would be above 15% in both, banking for
        SMEs and banking for large corporate companies. In particular, in SMEs banking
        the parties' combined market share will be [30-40]% (RBS [30-40]% and ABN
        AMRO assets [0-5]%) in the overall market and each of the current accounts,
        deposits and loans markets. In corporate banking for large corporate companies,
        the parties will have a combined market share of at most [20-30]% (RBS [20-30]%
        and ABN AMRO assets [0-5]%) in the overall market and slightly lower market
5  See Case No COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB.
6  See Case No COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB.
7  See Case No COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB and Case No COMP/M.4155 BNP Paribas/BNL.
                                                  4

        shares in current accounts ([20-30]%), deposits ([20-30]%), loans ([10-20]%8)
        domestic payments ([20-30]%) and documentary credits ([20-30]%). In the product
        sub-segments proposed by the notifying party (see above paragraph 16), the parties'
        combined market share would additionally exceed 15% in domestic cash
        management (RBS [20-30]% and ABN AMRO assets [0-5]%) and trade finance
        (RBS [20-30]% and ABN AMRO assets [0-5]%).
    27. In view of the modest accretion of the combined market shares and the presence of
        strong competitors in these UK corporate banking segments (including Barclays,
        HSBC and Lloyds) the proposed concentration will not significantly change the
        conditions of competition on these markets and therefore does not raise serious
        doubts as to the compatibility with the common market.
    28. Similarly, with respect to factoring services, the parties' activities overlap only in
        the UK. RBS estimates that the parties' combined market share will be at most [20-
        30]% (RBS [10-20]% and ABN AMRO assets [0-5]%). As regards financial market
        services, RBS estimates that the combined market share of the parties at EEA level
        will be below 15% in any product market definition. Should the market be defined
        as national in scope, the parties' combined market share would exceed 15% only in
        the UK and for the following segments (i) interest rate risk management (RBS [30-
        40]% and ABN AMRO assets [0-5]%), (ii) foreign exchange (RBS [20-30]% and
        ABN AMRO assets [0-5]%); and (iii) trading in securities (RBS [10-20]% and
        ABN AMRO assets [0-5]%).
    29. In view of the limited increment in market share and the presence of other large
        competitors in these markets (including for example Barclays, Lloyds, HSBC and
        HBOS in factoring and Barclays, Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan and Citigroup in
        financial market services) the proposed concentration will not give rise to any
        negative effect on competition in these markets.
    30. Finally, with regards to investment banking and the sub-segments thereof, the
        parties' combined market shares, according to RBS' estimates, are below 15% at
        EEA-level. Should the investment banking products be considered national in
        scope, the only affected product segment would be debt capital markets in the
        Netherlands where the parties' combined market share will be [20-30]% (RBS [0-
        5]% and ABN AMRO assets [10-20]%) In Sweden, the parties' combined market
        share also exceeds, yet slightly, 15% (RBS [0-5]% and ABN AMRO [10-20]%).
        Considering the limited overlap and the presence of large international banks as
        competitors (e.g. Barclays, UBS, Société Générale, Merrill Lynch or Deutsche
        Bank), the proposed operation does not raise serious doubts as to the compatibility
        with the common market.
VI. CONCLUSION
8  Using syndicated loans as a proxy as proposed by the notifying party.
                                                        5

31. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                For the Commission
                                                (signed)
                                                Neelie Kroes,
                                                Member of the Commission
                                            6
