                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 11.01.2008
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2008) D/200059
  In the published version of this decision, some
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article                      PUBLIC VERSION
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                     MERGER PROCEDURE
  general description.                                            ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sirs,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.4814 – FDC / AIB / JV
                Notification of 29.11.2007 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
1. On 29.11.2007, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
      pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by which First Data
      Corporation ("FDC", USA) and Allied Irish Banks ("AIB", Ireland) acquire within the
      meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation joint control of the merchant
      acquiring business currently owned by AIB by way of a purchase of shares.
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the operation
      falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation but does not raise serious doubts as to its
      compatibility with the common market and the EEA agreement.
I.      THE PARTIES
3. AIB provides a diverse range of banking, financial and related services primarily in
      Ireland but also in Poland, the UK and the US.
4. FDC is primarily active in electronic commerce and payment services for businesses
      worldwide. The company provides credit, debit, retail, smart card and stored-value card
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

    issuing and merchant transaction processing services as well as internet commerce
    solutions. In Europe FDC cooperates with banks to provide merchant processing
    services through joint ventures and revenue sharing agreements.
5. The JV will be engaged in the provision of merchant acquiring and processing services,
    in particular, services relating to the use and acceptance of payment cards of all types,
    principally in Ireland but also in the UK and elsewhere in Europe. The specific activities
    in which the JV will be engaged in are usually referred to as “merchant card processing”
    and “merchant card acquiring”, where the term “merchant” means a retailer or other
    vendor of goods or services who accepts a card as the means of payment.
1.    II.        THE OPERATION
6.   AIB and FDC (the parties) will enter into a joint venture agreement relating to the Irish
    merchant acquiring business currently owned by AIB. The JV will have an option to
    purchase AIB's UK merchant acquiring business.
III. CONCENTRATION
7. The proposed transaction amounts to the acquisition of joint control of the Irish
    merchant acquiring business currently owned by AIB. The JV will be co-owned by FDC
    [approximately 50%]% and AIB [approximately 50%]%. FDC will appoint […] out of a
    total of 8 members of the Board of directors, including the Chairman which will have a
    casting vote. AIB will appoint […] members and […] members will be independent.
8. However, AIB and FDC will jointly control the JV due to the nature and extent of the
    veto rights held by AIB over several critical issues which are strategic for the
    commercial behaviour of the JV. The business objectives and 10-year financial
    projections have been jointly agreed between AIB and FDC as part of the JV agreement
    and will be appended to the Shareholders Agreement. The initial budget and business
    plan for the JV (until 31 December 2010) will also be agreed jointly by AIB and FDC.
    […] However, a dispute resolution mechanism to settle disputes between AIB and FDC
    in relation to the annual budget and annual business plan as well as any disagreement on
    any "material" issue will be put in place. This dispute resolution mechanism finally
    results in a deadlock situation […].
9. Thus, the transaction constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3 (1)(b)
    of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
10. The transaction has a Community dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the Merger
    Regulation. The parties have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of €
    5,000 million (FDC € 5.6 billion, AIB € 8.4 billion), and their respective aggregate
    Community-wide turnovers exceed € 250 million (FDC: […] and AIB: […]). They do
    not achieve more than two thirds of their Community-wide turnover in one and the same
    Member State.
V.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
                                                  2

A.    RELEVANT PRODUCT MARKETS
11. The proposed transaction concerns the activities of payment card processing and
    merchant acquiring. According to previous Commission decisions, processing is a
    product market distinct from merchant acquiring (and card issuing).2
12. Payment card acquiring is the business of contracting merchants for payment card
    acceptance on own account and risk. The notifying parties submit that this product
    market should not be subdivided further.
13. In most cases, the Commission has left it open whether the acquiring business should be
    divided further according to the type of scheme organisation (national/international), the
    type of card (credit/debit cards) or the brand (Visa/VPay or MasterCard/Maestro).3
14. Since the concentration does not raise serious doubts as to the existence of a significant
    impediment of effective competition on any of the alternative markets considered, the
    precise market definition for merchant acquiring can be left open also for the purpose of
    this decision.
15. Processing of payment card transactions includes services of a technical nature such as
    the routing of transactions, requests for authorisations including the verification of stop
    lists (for stolen or counterfeited cards), card identifications, generation of statements and
    invoicing etc. The notifying parties submit that the market for transaction processing
    services should not be subdivided into separate markets for issuing processing and
    acquiring processing or into separate markets for issuing processing for international
    cards and issuing processing for domestic cards.
16. The Commission in previous decisions indicated that the processing market might be
    further subdivided into a product market for issuing processing and a product market for
    acquiring processing but finally left this question open.4 Whether issuing and acquiring
    processing services are separate product markets can be left open for the purpose of the
    current transaction, since the concentration does not raise serious doubts in any of the
    alternative market definitions considered.
2.    B. RELEVANT GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS
17. Regarding the acquiring business, the notifying parties submit that that the geographic
    scope of the market is at least national but increasingly EEA-wide due to the broadening
    scope of international and national card schemes as well as the implementation of the
    Single European Payment Area (SEPA).
2    Commission Decision Comp/M.4316 Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC of 29 September 2006.
3   Commission Decision Comp/M.4316 Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC of 29 September 2006.
4   Commission decision COMP/M.4316 – Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC of 29 September 2006.
                                                     3

18. The Commission has previously found that the acquiring service for domestic cards was
    national in scope and indicated that this probably also applied to the acquiring services
    for international cards, but finally left the geographic definition of the latter open.5
19. With respect to the activities of transaction processing, the notifying parties submit that
    the market is at least EEA-wide in scope due to the absence of any regulatory or other
    restrictions. The Commission in previous decisions found that transaction processing
    may be national in scope, but finally left the question of the precise geographic market
    definitions open.6
20. There are indications that the acquiring and the processing markets – also with respect
    to international cards - are still national in scope. However, the precise geographic
    market definition can be left open for the purpose of the current transaction since the
    concentration does not raise serious doubts as to the existence of a significant
    impediment of effective competition on any of the alternative market definitions
    considered.
3.    C. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
21. For (overall) merchant acquiring activities and transaction processing the activities of
    the parties overlap in three countries: the UK, Italy and the Netherlands. None of these
    markets are affected, because the parties' joint market shares in these countries do not
    exceed 15%.7
22. If the relevant geographic market for merchant acquiring services is considered to be
    EEA-wide, the Parties combined shares for merchant acquiring activities would be
    approximately [0-5]%.
23. If the merchant acquiring market were subdivided according to type of scheme, type of
    card or brand, the combined market share of the parties would be below 15% with the
    exception of the international card sub-segment in the Netherlands, where the combined
    market share is significantly higher8. However, the increments of the combined market
    shares in merchant acquiring activities would be very small (less than [0-5]%) due to the
    limited presence of AIB.
24. Regarding transaction processing there are no significant overlaps. There are no
    overlaps between the parties for transaction processing services in relation to domestic
    cards at national level because AIB's transaction processing activities are located in
5   Commission Decision COMP/M.4316 Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC of 29 September 2006. In Commission
    Decision COMP/M.4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO, the Commission analysed the market for the acquiring of
    national (debit) cards.
6   Commission decision COMP/M.2567 - NordBanken/Postgirot, of 8 November 2001; Commission
    decision COMP/M.4316 – Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC of 29 September 2006.
7   Market shares quoted in this decision are based on the parties' estimates unless stated otherwise.
8   The parties estimate their combined market share to [20-30]%. The market investigation suggests that the
    combined market share is above [30-40]%. Both confirm very small increments (below [0-5]%).
                                                          4

    Ireland and FDC is not active in transaction processing of domestic or international
    cards for any customers in Ireland.
25. If the relevant geographic market for all transaction processing services is considered to
    be EEA-wide, the Parties’ combined shares for any segment of these activities would be
    less than 15%. These conclusions would hold if the transaction processing market would
    be split between acquiring processing (for domestic and international cards respectively)
    and total processing (for domestic and international cards respectively) and examined at
    national level. In addition, there are strong competitors in all three countries where the
    activities for transaction processing of the parties overlap.
26. Since the JV will not be active in card issuing and FDC is not present in debit or credit
    card issuing, the parties consider that the only potential vertical relationship of relevance
    is that between the merchant acquiring services to be offered by the JV and the
    transaction processing activities of FDC. AIB has a market share of [40-50] % in the
    Irish market for merchant acquiring. FDC owns 70% of Omnipay, a processing
    platform in Ireland which provides processing services for transactions originating from
    locations across Europe. […]. Moreover, the parties argue that potential competition
    concerns of a vertical nature would be alleviated by the fact that AIB has a clear
    incentive to ensure high quality, low cost card-related services to its customers since it
    is competing on various banking markets in Ireland and elsewhere. In addition, the JV
    will face competition from a substantial number of existing competitors in Ireland and
    other EEA countries.
27. The overwhelming majority of the respondents to the Commission market investigation
    were neutral or positive about the proposed transaction. They stated that the creation of
    the JV is likely to intensify competition for card transaction processing and that it will
    possibly drive prices down due to the existence of economies of scale.
28. Based on the above considerations, the Commission concludes that the concentration
    does not raise serious doubts as to the existence of a significant impediment of effective
    competition on the markets for merchant acquiring and for transaction processing
    services.
VI. CONCLUSION
29. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
    139/2004.
                                                        For the Commission
                                                        signed
                                                        Neelie KROES
                                                        Member of the Commission
                                                   5
