                          COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                Brussels, 28-IX-2007
                                                                SG-Greffe(2007) D/205790
      In the published version of this decision, some
      information has been omitted pursuant to Article                   PUBLIC VERSION
      17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
      concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
      other confidential information. The omissions are
      shown thus […]. Where possible the information                 MERGER PROCEDURE
      omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a          ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
      general description.
   To the notifying party
   Dear Sir/Madam,
   Subject:       Case No COMP/M.4860 – HRE/ DEPFA
                  Notification of 24.08.2007 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                  No 139/20041
   I.       INTRODUCTION
1.      On 24/08/2007, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration pursuant
       to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (“the Merger Regulation”) by which
       the undertaking Hypo Real Estate Holding AG, ("HRE", Germany), together with its
       affiliates "Hypo Real Estate Group", acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the
       Merger Regulation control of the whole of Depfa Bank plc, ("DEPFA", Ireland), together
       with its affiliates "Depfa Group" by way of purchase of shares.
2.      After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious doubts
       as to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
       Agreement.
   II. THE PARTIES
3.      HRE is the holding company of Hypo Real Estate Group, active in the field of real estate
       financing for corporate customers, mainly commercial real estate financing, in the field of
       financing of infrastructure projects in the framework of public-private partnerships, as
       well as in the field of issuing of covered bonds and unsecured bonds.
   1   OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
   Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

4.      DEPFA is active in the field of state financing, in the field of financing of infrastructure
        projects in the framework of public-private partnerships, as well as in the field of issuing
        of covered bonds and unsecured bonds.
   III. THE OPERATION
5.      The parties have signed a Merger Agreement on July 23, 2007. The notified concentration
        concerns the acquisition of all shares in DEPFA by HRE and consequently the acquisition
        of sole control over Depfa Group by HRE.
   IV. CONCENTRATION
6.      Leading to the acquisition of sole control the transaction therefore constitutes a
        concentration within the meaning of Art. 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
   V. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.      The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover of more than
        EUR 5 000 millions (Hypo Real Estate Group: EUR […] millions; Depfa Group: EUR
        […] millions). The aggregate Community-wide turnover of each of at least two of the
        undertakings concerned is more than EUR 250 million (Hypo Real Estate Group: EUR
        […] millions; Depfa Group: EUR […] million) for 2006. While Hypo Real Estate Group
        generated two thirds of its income in 2006 in Germany, Depfa Group did not generate two
        thirds of its income in any Member State. The notified transaction therefore has a
        Community dimension.
    VI. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
                        A.     RELEVANT PRODUCT MARKETS
8.      The parties consider that that there are a number of product markets relevant for the
        purpose of the assessment of the current transaction. These are the Public Sector
        Financing, the Financing of Public-Private Partnership Project Companies (PPP), the Real
        Estate Financing, the Issuing of Covered Bonds, the Investment Banking and the
        Activities Related to Financial Markets.
9.      The Commission has in previous decisions noted that the banking sector may be divided
        into broad sub-sectors: retail banking, corporate banking (including investment banking)
        and financial markets such as money markets and other financial services. These sectors
        may possibly be further sub-divided into individual product segments2. Given that the
        overlap of the activities of the parties exceeds 15% exclusively on a potentially separate
        market for the issuing of jumbo (volume of at least EUR 1 billion) covered bonds issued
        under German law, the product market definition may be in this case left open.
                        B.     RELEVANT GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS
10.     In previous decisions the Commission considered the market for Public Sector Financing
        as national in scope3. The parties believe that this market is not national any more but has
   2 Cf cases M.3894 -Unicredito/HVB and M.2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot
   3 Cf case M.2400 – Dexia/Artesia
                                                     2

       become at least EEA-wide. However, the parties have provided the Commission with
       market shares both for the EEA and for individual Member States. The relevant
       geographic market can be left open in this case.
11.    The Commission has in previous decisions left open the exact geographical market
       delineation in the segment of corporate banking4. The parties believe that the markets for
       Financing of PPP and Real State Financing, as regards corporate customers, are at least
       EEA-wide. However, they have provided the Commission with market information for an
       EEA-wide market as well as for national markets. In the present case, the exact definition
       can also be left open.
12. The Commission has up to now not dealt with the market delineation in the area of
       covered bonds. Since covered bonds from different Member States are exchangeable from
       a demand perspective and the demand for covered bonds is international the parties
       assume an EEA-wide market for covered bonds. However, the parties have provided the
       Commission with information on the market shares on the basis of national markets as
       well. The exact geographic definition can be left open in the present case.
13.    The Commission left open in the past whether the geographic market for investment
       banking is EEA-wide or national5. The parties submit that it is at least EEA-wide.
       However, given that the concentration will not give rise to any competition concerns
       under any possible market delineation, the geographic definition can also be left open in
       this case.
14.    The parties agree with the Commission EEA-wide market definition6 concerning the
       Activities Related to Financial Markets. However, for the purpose of this case, it is not
       necessary to define the relevant geographic scope, because the concentration does not
       create or strengthen a dominant position.
                        C.    COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
15.    The only affected market is the market for jumbo (volume of at least EUR 1 billion)
       covered bonds issued under German law, assuming national markets for covered bonds,
       where the parties have a combined market share of [10-20%] (Hypo Real Estate Group [5-
       15%], Depfa Group [5-15%]).
16.    The market share of Depfa Group in relation to the total portfolio of jumbo covered bonds
       issued under German law has receded in the last years because the Group issues the
       majority of its newly issued covered bonds under Irish law since a few years back.
       Furthermore, the market share of Depfa Group will probably reduce itself in this year
       because of the expiration of two jumbo covered bond issued under German law.
  4 Cf cases M.4484 - Danske Bank/Sampo Bank, M.2400 Dexia/Artesia, or M.3894 Unicredito/HVB
  5 Cf case M.1856 - Citigroup/Schroders
  6 Cf case M.1764 - Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken/BFG Bank
                                                     3

17.  The parties face competition from a number of competitors in this market (i.e. EuroHypo,
     with a market share of 17%, Essenhyp 11%, Corealcredit Bank 9%, DG Hyp 8% and
     Hypo Vereinsbank 7%). Recently, new competitors entered the market (Aareal Bank,
     Deutsche Kreditbank, WestLB, HSH Nordbank and Sparkasse KölnBonn). Up to the entry
     into force of the new German Pfandbrief Act only special banks under private law and
     credit institutes and state banks of the German Länder under public law were allowed to
     issue covered bonds. With the entry into force of the new German Act, every credit
     institute can issue covered bonds under German law, as long as it fulfils certain minimal
     requirements and has a respective regulatory concession. The only pre-conditions for the
     granting of the permission are that the financial institute can demonstrate that it will
     regularly issue covered bonds in a sustainable manner and that it possesses an adequate
     organizational structure to issue the bonds.
18.  There are no vertically affected markets.
  VIII. CONCLUSION
19.  For the above reasons, it can be concluded that the notified concentration will not raise
     serious doubts as to the compatibility with the common market or in a substantial part of
     it; therefore the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and to
     declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
     decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
     139/2004.
                                                      For the Commission,
                                                      signed
                                                      Neelie KROES
                                                      Member of the Commission
                                                  4
