                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 24.10.1994
                                                              PUBLIC VERSION
                                                              MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                              ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                            Registered with advice of delivery
                                                            To the notifying parties.
Dear Sirs,
Subject :       Case IV/M.491 - GENERAL RE/KÖLNISCHE RE
                Notification of 21.9.94 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation n 4064/89
1.     On 21st September 1994, General Re Corporation ("GR") and CKAG Colonia Konzern
       AG ("CKAG") notified an operation whereby GR will establish indirect sole control over
       Kölnische Rückversicherungs-Gesellschaft AG ("KR"), a subsidiary of the UAP Group
       ("UAP") controlled through CKAG.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and does not raise
       serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of
       the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
3.     GR is an American corporation which provides reinsurance, insurance and related services
       mainly in the United States of America and in more than thirty other countries throughout
       the world. CKAG is a wholly owned subsidiary of UAP, a composite insurer engaged in
       all types of insurance, reinsurance and, to a minor extent, banking and financial services.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                                 2
4.   GR intends to establish indirect single control over KR. For this purpose, GR and CKAG
     have agreed to create a new company which will hold all of CKAG's in KR (75% of the
     voting shares and 29.83 % of the non-voting preference shares). CKAG is transferring its
     stake at book value and taking in exchange 49.9 % stake in the new company while GR
     will contribute cash and will take a 50.1 % stake. The remaining cash contributed by GR
     will be attributed to a capital reserve. The new company will manage and invest the funds
     made available by GR's capital contribution. A guaranteed dividend is to be paid to
     CKAG. A call option in favour of GR to be exercised between 2002 and 2004 exists. If
     GR chooses not to exercise its call option before it expires, CKAG in turn will have a call
     option to be exercised between 2004 and 2007.
II.  COMMUNITY DIMENSION
5.   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of
     5.000 million ECU. Both GR and KR have a Community-wide turnover in excess of 250
     million ECU but they do not both achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
     Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation
     therefore has a Community dimension.
III. NATURE OF THE OPERATION
6.   The decision making process in the new company will be carried out by a supervisory
     board of three members (two appointed by GR, one appointed by CKAG) and a board of
     management of 3/4 members (two to be nominated by GR and one by CKAG). If four
     managing directors are appointed, the fourth director will be nominated jointly by GR and
     CKAG. The chairman of the board of management will be nominated by GR and will
     have a casting vote. In the shareholders' meetings GR will have 50.1% of the voting
     rights while CKAG will have 49.9%. Resolutions will be passed by majority. Unanimity
     or qualified majority (75% vote) is only required for the management of funds and for
     matters not going beyond the protection of shareholders rights.
7.   The agreement will confer sole control of the new company on GR even though the
     management and investment of funds available will be jointly controlled by GR and
     CKAG.
8.   KR is a German corporation (Aktiengesellschaft - AG) governed by its board of
     management appointed by the company's supervisory board. Four members of the
     supervisory board are appointed by the staff and eight by the shareholders' meeting. The
     parties have agreed that GR will nominate six and CKAG two members each. The
     chairman, appointed by GR will have a casting vote. [...](1). GR will exert sole control over
     KR.
9.   In view of the above, the notified operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning
     of Article 3(1)b of the Regulation.
(1)
        Deleted business secret.

                                               3
IV  RELEVANT MARKETS
    A) Relevant product market
10. The business of reinsurance represents a specialist form of insurance. The purpose of
    reinsurance is to spread the risks between insurers. The reinsurer accepts either the whole
    or part of the risk insured by another insurer and thereby provides the primary insurer with
    the ability to increase the amount of insurance underwritten and to diversify risk over time
    and geographic area. Thus, reinsurance is traded between industry specialists, it is written
    only with other insurance companies, no premium income is derived from reinsurance
    sales to the public, and no channels for retail distribution are therefore required.
    Accordingly reinsurance must be considered distinct from direct insurance.
    B) Relevant geographic market
11. Since reinsurance products are traded between industry specialists and not sold to the
    general public, the controls by national authorities over the conduct of pure reinsurance
    tend to be much less extensive than in direct insurance. The fact that the reinsurance
    business can be run without the necessity to maintain a large distribution force also tends
    to indicate the global character of the market. The existence of a world market is also
    evidenced by the presence of international broker firms which mediate reinsurance
    volumes on a worldwide scale.
V   ASSESSMENT
12. GR provides predominantly non-life reinsurance to its clients. Less than 2 % of its EEA
    premium is derived from life insurance. KR provides both life and non-life reinsurance.
    Exact statistics on reinsurance world market shares are not available. KR and GR are
    currently ranked sixth and seventh respectively amongst the world's largest reinsurers, and
    their combined world market share will be less than the individual shares of the two
    largest reinsurers, Munich Re and Swiss Re, and in any case, well below 10 %. In view of
    this, the operation does not raise serious doubts about its compatibility with the common
    market.
VI  ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
13. In the joint venture agreement, GR and CKAG have included a non-competition clause
    which stipulates that CKAG will not compete with KR during the period of time that
    CKAG remains a shareholder in the J.V. plus an additional five years which implies a
    minimum period of twelve years. CKAG remains free to hold limited participation in
    other reinsurance companies and UAP's reinsurance activities are not in any way
    restricted.
14. This clause is intended to guarantee the transfer to GR of the full value of the assets
    transferred; these include both the technical know-how required to operate a reinsurance
    business, which includes sophisticated actuarial techniques and also the goodwill, which
    in the reinsurance sector includes the professional reputation of the reinsurance company
    and the loyalty of its customers.

                                                4
15. As CKAG would be in a position to start a new entity which could run a professional
     reinsurance business like KR, GR must be allowed to safeguard its investment and
     therefore the non competition clause can be seen as a restriction directly related and
     necessary to the implementation of the concentration. However a period of five years is
     recognised as appropriate when the transfer of assets includes goodwill and know-how,
     and the present decision covers the non-competition clause for a maximum period of five
     years.
                                                *
                                             *     *
For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and to
declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                 For the Commission,
