                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 05.02.2008
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2008) D/20053
   In the published version of this decision, some
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article                      PUBLIC VERSION
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are                  MERGER PROCEDURE
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                   ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
   general description.
                                                                 To the notifying parties:
Dear Sirs,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.4950 - Aviva/ Bank Zachodni
               Notification of 20.12.2007 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
               No 139/20041
  1.    On 20 December 2007, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
        concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the
        Merger Regulation) by which the undertakings Aviva plc ("Aviva", United Kingdom)
        and Bank Zachodni WBK S.A. ("BZ WBK", Poland), controlled by Allied Irish Banks
        group ("AIB group", Ireland), acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the
        Merger Regulation joint control of the undertakings BZ WBK – CU Towarzystwo
        Ubezpieczen na Zycie S.A. ("JV Life Insurance", Poland) and BZ WBK – CU
        Towarzystwo Ubezpieczen Ogólnych S.A. ("JV Non-Life Insurance", Poland) by way of
        purchase of shares in two newly created companies constituting joint ventures.
  2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the operation
        falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the common market and the EEA agreement.
(1)      THE PARTIES
  3.    Aviva is an international insurance group that is also active in long term savings and
        fund management. In Poland Aviva is active in the underwriting of life and non-life
        insurance, and the provision of mutual funds, pension funds and asset management
        services.
  4.    BZ WBK is a universal bank offering services to personal customers, small and medium
        enterprises as well as large corporate companies, through its specialised subsidiaries it
1    OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

      also performs a wide range of activities such as mutual funds, brokerage activities,
      factoring and asset management. BZ WBK, listed on the Warsaw Stock Exchange, is a
      controlled subsidiary of the AIB group which holds 70.5% of its shares.
  5.  AIB group has two subsidiaries in Poland (i) AIB European Investments Ltd Poland -
      providing consultancy and research activities related to the AIB group's interest in the
      Polish market; and (ii) European Convergence Partners sp. zo.o - providing property
      advisory services. Neither of these subsidiaries is active in any market in which BZ
      WBK, Aviva or the JVs are active, or in any related market.
  6.  JV Life Insurance will be active in underwriting life insurance for mortgage borrowers
      and investment products. JV Non-Life Insurance will be active in underwriting the
      following insurances: card theft, enhanced card theft, cover for unemployment and
      accidental death, travel insurance, home contents and civil liability insurance. Both JVs
      will partly underwrite the payment protection package for home mortgages and payment
      protection for cash loan borrowers.
  7.  In the future the JVs may also develop new products such as unit linked investment
      products, protection against unemployment, direct personal accident insurance (sold by
      telephone to bank customers) and direct travel insurance. The JVs will initially distribute
      these products only through the BZ WBK branch network. It is anticipated that the
      branch network will remain the most important distribution channel although other
      channels may be considered in the future.
(2)    THE OPERATION
  8.  By agreements dated 20 November 2007, BZ WBK and Aviva International
      Insurance Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of Aviva have agreed to set up two
      insurance companies in Poland for life assurance and general insurance (JV Life
      Insurance and JV Non-Life Insurance respectively). It is noted that Polish law
      requires to run life insurance and non-life insurance separately therefore two JVs
      were created and each JV will obtain a license from the Polish regulator. The
      proposed concentration was announced on 21 November 2007.
  9.  According to the shareholders agreements governing the strategic direction of the JVs
      Aviva and BZ WBK will each hold an equal number of shares and an equal number
      of votes at the Shareholders Meeting of the two JVs. The Management Boards of the
      two companies will be composed of the same people; the Management Board will
      have 4 members (2 Aviva / 2 BZ WBK) and the Supervisory Board 4 to 6 members
      (both parties will have max. 3 members and min. 1 member). None of the parties will
      have a casting vote and the board resolutions shall be approved by a simple majority
      of votes. Reserved matters such as the preparation/approval of the business plan and
      changes thereto and investment policy will require unanimity of the members of the
      Management Board and the Supervisory Board.
  10. It is intended that the JVs will be created for an unlimited period, although the
      Shareholders Agreements are initially concluded for a [10-20] year duration with an
      automatically extension for further periods of [0-10] years. The JVs shall bear the
      entire commercial risk for the distribution of their product through BZ WBK's
      channel and will not have any financial guarantees in place with the parents if they
      are not successful. The joint ventures will have their own staff, offices and license
      and will have all the necessary assets in terms of finances, underwriting and
      marketing of insurance products.
                                                 2

  11. Therefore, the transaction leads to the acquisition of joint control by Aviva and BZ
       WBK over the two newly created JVs and constitutes a concentration within the
       meaning of Article 3(4) of the Merger Regulation.
(3)     COMMUNITY DIMENSION
  12. The transaction has a Community dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the Merger
       Regulation. The parties have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of
       €5,000 million (Aviva € 42,150 million, AIB group € 4,320 million) and a
       Community-wide turnover in excess of € 250 million (Aviva € 37,561 million, AIB
       group € 4,209 million). None of the parties achieves more than two thirds of its
       Community-wide turnover in the same Member State.
  13. Based on the above, the notified operation constitutes a concentration within the
       meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
(4)     THE RELEVANT MARKETS
      A.      Relevant product markets
  14. The JVs will operate on the markets for underwriting of life insurance and non-life
       insurance. Moreover, both Aviva and BZ WBK are active in asset management in
       Poland.
  15. In previous decisions, the Commission has distinguished between the provision of
       insurance products into non-life insurance, life insurance and reinsurance.
  16. The Commission has in a number of decisions acknowledged that there is a
       significant degree of supply side substitutability in the non-life insurance segment, as
       certain insurance products require a common set of skills and resources including risk
       management, administration, IT systems and technology2. The Commission has found
       that from a supply side perspective the conditions for insurance of different types of
       risks are similar and most large insurance companies are active in multiple risk types.
       This suggests that there is supply side substitutability between the different segments
       of non-life insurance therefore many different types of non-life insurance could be
       included in the same product market3.
  17. However, this substitutability does not exist from the customer’s perspective (demand
       side) and the market could potentially be divided into as many products as there are
       different risks4. From the demand side, the Commission has considered that there is
       limited substitution for the insured between the different categories of policy offered5.
  18. As regards life insurance, the Commission has found that life assurance products can
       in principle be divided into as many product markets as there are different kinds of
2   See Case No IV/M.1142 – Commercial Union/General Accident.
3   Case No COMP/M.3035 – Berkshire Hathaway Converium/Gaum/JV; Case No COMP – M.2676
    Sampo/Varma Sampo/If Holding/JV; Case No IV/M.1142 – Commercial Union/General Accident.
4   See, for example, Case No COMP/M.759 – Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance and Case No COMP/M.862 –
    AXA/UAP.
5   Case No COMP/M.3035 – Berkshire Hathaway Converium/Gaum/JV.
                                                   3

       risks covered6. Their characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and there is
       typically no substitutability for the consumer between the different risks insured7. As
       such the Commission has looked at the various segments of the life insurance market,
       including life insurance products, investment products and pensions. The
       Commission has not found it necessary however to determine conclusively whether
       the market should be subdivided accordingly.
  19. The majority of respondents to the market investigation8 indicated that life assurance
       could be further subdivided into a market for life risk products, a market for savings
       and investment products and a market for supplementary pension products both from
       a demand and supply side perspective. The market investigation confirmed the
       Commission's earlier findings that the market could be further separated into
       individual and group life policies and into unit-linked and non unit-linked policies.
       However, the exact definition can be left open as no competition concerns arise in
       any alternative product market definition.
  20. The Commission has previously defined asset management as a relevant product
       market and concluded that it is distinct from life and non-life insurance. It includes
       the creation, establishment and marketing of retailed pooled funds (mutual funds, unit
       trusts, investment trusts and open-ended investment companies), and the provision of
       portfolio management services.9 The market investigation has confirmed this
       definition but indicated that the management of pension funds could be a separate
       market.
  21. The Polish pension system has a relatively complex and unique structure, it is based
       on three pillars, the first two pillars are based upon mandatory contributions from
       wages while the third pillar is voluntary. The first pillar is based on notional defined
       contributions and run by the State. The second pillar is run by open pension funds i.e.
       independent legal entities created and managed by a joint stock company that
       obtained a permission from the Insurance and Pension Funds Supervisory
       Commission. These pension funds are subject to quantitative investment restrictions
       and minimum return guarantees. The third pillar provides an additional layer of
       pension based on employer established schemes to which employees may make
       additional contributions to supplement those of the employer. The third pillar can be
       run by investment funds, broker companies, life insurance companies or banks. The
       market investigation indicated that obligatory pensions (pillars one and two) and
       voluntary pensions (pillar three) form two separate product markets. However, the
       exact definition can be left open as no competition concerns arise in any alternative
       product market definition.
        B.       Relevant geographic markets
6   Case No COMP/M.2676 – Sampo/Varma Sampo/If Holding/JV.
7   Case No COMP/M.862 – AXA/UAP.
8   Questionnaires were sent to competitors of the parties, both insurance companies and distributors.
9   See Case COMP/M.1453, AXA/GRE, 8 April 1998.
                                                          4

  22. In past decisions10, whilst recognising that insurance markets are becoming more
        open to intra-Community competition, the Commission has held that the markets for
        non-life insurance and life insurance are generally national in scope due to the
        national distribution channels, the established market structures, fiscal constraints and
        differing regulatory systems11. Differences in regulatory regimes and legal
        obligations mean that the conditions of competition are normally appreciably
        different in the various Member States. In addition, basic terms and conditions of the
        policies are determined on a national level and competition normally takes place on a
        nation-wide basis, with national advertising and increasingly centralised sales
        functions. The market investigation generally confirmed that life insurance in Poland
        would be mainly national in scope but that the market for saving and investment
        products could possibly be seen as broader than national from a supply side
        perspective.
  23. In previous decisions the Commission has considered that the market for asset
        management services may be as wide as global in scope given that there is a need to
        pool risks on an international basis.12 The present market investigation confirmed the
        international character of asset management and mutual funds.
  24. According to the Parties, the market for Polish pensions is undoubtedly a national
        one, all pensions sold are designed specifically for the Polish market. Polish
        customers are restricted by regulation from applying their contributions to pension
        products other than such special authorised Polish pensions. The market investigation
        has also broadly confirmed the view of the Parties.
  25. For the purpose of the current decision, the exact geographic scope can be left open
        as the proposed transaction does not lead to competition concerns on any alternative
        market definition.
(5)      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
         Insurance products
  26. The JVs will be active in the underwriting of life and non-life insurance in Poland.
  27. Currently Aviva is active in the underwriting of both life and non-life insurance in
        Poland and will continue to be so following the proposed transaction. Aviva had an
        estimated market share of [10-20]% in all life insurance in 2006 and less than [<5]%
        in non-life insurance during the same period (based on gross premiums). BZ WBK's
        only involvement in the insurance sector is the distribution of insurance products
        through its bank branches and a small local company. As far as distribution of
10  See, for example, Cases No COMP/M.759 - Sun Alliance/Royal Insurance and COMP/M.2225 -
    Fortis/ASR.
11  Whilst not relevant to the markets in the present transaction, the Commission has indicated that some
    differences in the geographic scope of different types of non-life/general insurance may exist (e.g. in
    relation to transport liability and marine, aviation and transport (MAT) insurance for large corporate
    customers and large risk respectively): see Case No COMP/M.3395 - Sampo/If Skadeförsäkring and Case
    No COMP/M.2676 - Sampo/Sampo-Varma/If Holding/JV.
12  See Case COMP/M.1886, CGU/Norwich Union, 13 April 2004; Case COMP/M.1453, AXA/GRE, 8 April
    1999, Case COMP/M.1067, Merrill Lynch/Mercury, 22 December 1997; Case COMP/M.1043,
    BAT/Zurich, 16 February 1998.
                                                          5

    insurance is concerned, BZ WBK represented less than [<5]% of the distribution of
    both sorts of insurances in 2006.
28. Overall there are a number of national and international players active in the Polish
    insurance market in both underwriting and distribution. As regards the distribution of
    insurance products all major banks offer such products via their branch network. This
    includes PKO BP, the largest Polish banks and Pekao SA (member of the Unicredit
    group) the second largest Polish bank.
    Related markets (Asset management and pension funds)
29. The JVs will not be active in this area but they will buy asset management services
    from both Aviva and BZ WBK on arm's length terms and on a non-exclusive basis.
    The parties' estimate their combined market share in Poland in 2006 in asset
    management to [15-25]% (Aviva [5-10]%, BZ WBK [10-15]%). The market
    investigation did not contradict these figures. It should be noted that currently all of
    Aviva's asset management services in Poland are provided internally, managing the
    assets of the Aviva group companies (insurance companies and its mutual fund
    company).
30. Both parent companies are also active in the pension funds markets in Poland. Aviva
    both sells and distributes such funds in Poland. BZ WBK distributes Aviva pension
    funds on the basis of a distribution agreement. In 2006 Aviva had an estimated
    market share of [20-30]% on the upstream market (based on assets under
    management). BZ WBK is not active in the provision of pension funds. On the
    downstream market for the distribution of pension products Aviva had an estimated
    market share of [5-15]% in 2006 and BZ WBK less than [<5]%.
31. The market investigation has not provided any indications that the creation of the
    proposed JV Life Insurance would have as its object or effect the co-ordination of the
    competitive behaviour of Aviva and BZ WBK. Although Aviva has an important
    market share for asset management neither Aviva nor BZ WBK have significant
    market shares in the distribution of pension or related products. It is also unlikely that
    the creation of the JV Life Insurance would allow them to eliminate competition in
    any market in respect of a substantial part of the services in question. A number of
    competitors are active in the provision of pensions in Poland. This includes
    competitors such as ING ([20-25]% market share), OFE PZU "Zlota Jesien" ([10-
    15]%) and AIG OFE ([5-10]%). The market investigation also indicated that AXA
    and AEGON recently entered the Polish pension fund market.
32. Further as regards the vertical relationship, given the limited market shares and in
    line with the Commission's guidelines on the assessment on non-horizontal mergers,
    it is unlikely that competition concern would arise in non-horizontal merger where
    the market shares in the markets concerned are below 30%. This was also confirmed
    by the market investigation, which did not indicate any competition concerns in
    relation to either input or customer foreclosure.
33. Overall, both for the insurance products and the related markets, the Commission's
    market investigation did not provide any indication that the concentration would
    significantly impede effective competition in the common market, and in particular
    that there would not be any creation or strengthening of a dominant position due to
    the proposed transaction.
                                                6

(6)    CONCLUSION
  34. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
      operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
      Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
      Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                   For the Commission
                                                   (signed)
                                                   Neelie KROES
                                                   Member of the Commission
                                              7
