                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 19-XII-2007
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2007) D/208056
   In the published version of this decision, some
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article                     PUBLIC VERSION
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                     MERGER PROCEDURE
   general description.                                           ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:      Case No COMP/M.4912 - Calyon / Société Générale / Newedge
              Notification of 09 November 2007 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
              Regulation No 139/20041
      1. On 15 November 2007, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
         concentration pursuant to Article 4 and following a referral pursuant to Article 4(5) of
         Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by which the undertaking Fimat Group
         (“Fimat”, France) currently part of Société Générale S.A (“Société Générale”,
         France) enters into a full merger within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the Council
         Regulation with Calyon Financial Group (“Calyon Financial”, France) controlled by
         Calyon S.A. (“Calyon”, France), part of the Crédit Agricole group ("Crédit
         Agricole", France), by way of creation of a newly created company constituting a joint
         venture ("JV").
I.       THE PARTIES
   2.    Crédit Agricole is Europe's fifth largest bank by assets. Calyon is its corporate and
         investment banking subsidiary and a major global player in this field.
   3.    Calyon Financial – a company active in the brokerage of listed derivatives - is a
         wholly-owned subsidiary of Calyon.
1   OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

   4.    Société Générale is the tenth largest European bank by assets.
   5.    The Fimat Group comprises various wholly-owned subsidiaries of Société General
         active in the brokerage business.
II.      THE OPERATION
   6.    The notifying parties intend to create a JV – Newedge – which will be engaged in
         brokerage, i.e. the intermediation of various financial and non-financial instruments.
         Fimat and Calyon will contribute all of their assets, equity interests, branches and
         divisions to the JV.
III.     THE CONCENTRATION
   7.    Each of the notifying parties will have 50% of the voting rights. Each will appoint
         four directors to the company board, which will have a quorum of four (including at
         least two from each of Société Générale and Calyon). […] Board approval is
         necessary for the adoption of (or material amendment of) strategic plans and annual
         budgets, major investments and the appointment of the senior management.
   8.    For the above-mentioned reasons, the JV must be regarded as jointly controlled by
         the parties.
   9.    According to terms of the Joint Venture Agreement, Newedge will have access to
         sufficient resources including finance, staff and assets (tangible and intangible) in
         order to conduct on a lasting basis its business activities. The company will be an
         independent market player which is separate from its parent companies and which
         will offer its services directly to the market. All business between Newedge and its
         parents will be conducted on an "arm's length" basis.
   10. For a five-year period, both parent companies will continue to provide a portion of
         their brokerage business to Newedge. This portion will decrease each year according
         to a pre-determined formula ([…]% in 2008 decreasing to […]% in 2012). This
         arrangement will according to the parties not detract from the full-functionality of
         the JV, because the business “committed” to Newedge by its parents is likely to
         represent only a small proportion of the JV's total revenue. Newedge will therefore
         not be dependent on its shareholders for a significant proportion of its business2.
   11. The parties undertake not to compete with Newedge in the areas of clearing services,
         listed options and futures as long as they are shareholders in Newedge.3 The non-
         compete clause is in line with Commission’s ancillary restraints notice.4
2    According to the parties, on the hypothesis that the parents were to guarantee 100% of the business
     currently placed with Fimat and Calyon Financial with Newedge, this would represent only [5-10]% of
     Newedge’s income.
3     As far as execution services are concerned, no non-compete covenant has been given. Each parent
      company is therefore free to set up its own execution brokerage business in competition with Newedge,
      should it so wish.
                                                          2

  12. Thus, Newedge can be considered a full-function JV within the meaning of Article
       3(4) of the Merger Regulation.
IV.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION AND ARTICLE 4(5) REFERRAL
  13. The undertakings concerned generated a combined aggregate worldwide turnover of
       more than EUR 5 billion in 2006 (Crédit Agricole: EUR 89 billion; Société
       Générale: EUR 61 billion). Their aggregate Community-wide turnover exceeded
       EUR 250 million in 2006 (Crédit Agricole: EUR […] billion; Société Générale:
       EUR [..] billion). However, both undertakings realise more than two-thirds of their
       turnover in France. Therefore, the transaction does not have a Community dimension
       within the meaning of Article 1 of the Merger Regulation5.
  14. On 26 September 2007, the Commission received by means of a reasoned submission
       from the notifying parties a referral request pursuant to Article 4(5) of the Merger
       Regulation. According to the parties, the operation would have been capable of being
       examined under the national merger control laws of sixteen EU Member States
       (Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
       The Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United
       Kingdom), as well as Norway. No Member State objected to the referral of the
       proposed transaction to the Commission. The proposed transaction is therefore to be
       examined by the Commission.
  15. The operation is also subject to open merger review proceedings in Switzerland, the
       USA and South Korea.
V.     COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
V.1    Relevant Product markets
  16. The notifying parties are currently active in the intermediation of various financial
       and non-financial instruments, primarily derivatives instruments but also listed
       equity, prime brokerage, and various ancillary services.
  17. Newedge will offer its customers (which are financial institutions, hedge funds, asset
       managers and corporate clients) access to more than 70 exchanges in Europe, North
       America and the Asia/Pacific region, as well as the global OTC markets. Newedge's
       business will be limited to brokerage (i.e. it will not offer its own derivatives
       products).
  18. Newedge will offer (i.) brokerage services for the execution and clearing of listed
       derivatives, (ii.) brokerage services for over-the-counter (“OTC”) products, (iii.)
       brokerage services on listed securities, (iv.) prime brokerage services, and (v.)
       various ancillary services. It should be noted that brokerage on listed cash securities
       and prime brokerage (iii) and (iv) above) are contributed to Newedge only by Fimat.
4   Para 36 of the Commission notice on restrictions directly related and necessary to concentrations, OJ
    2005 C56, p. 24.
5   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Notice on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25).
                                                         3

  19. The parties suggest that there are two relevant product markets where horizontal
       overlaps occur: (i.) brokerage services for listed derivatives and (ii.) brokerage
       services for OTC derivatives.
     1) Brokerage services for listed derivatives
  20. According to the parties, brokerage services for listed derivatives consist in services
       allowing investor clients to buy and sell futures and options in financial and non-
       financial assets which are quoted on an exchange or other trading platform, without
       the need to become direct members of the platform which is subject to regulatory
       and commercial restrictions.
  21. Derivatives allow clients to hedge against the risk of future movements in the price
       of underlying assets such as currencies or commodities, as well as to speculate on
       how these prices will move, thereby generating a liquid forward market in the
       underlying asset. Brokers' clients may be institutional investors such as pension
       funds and other investment funds, hedge funds, the proprietary trading desks of
       banks and corporate customers.
  22. In the first place, the Commission considered whether the product market should be
       sub-divided into separate markets for execution and clearing of listed derivatives.
       Although these services may be bundled, they are also available separately in many
       cases.
  23. Execution consists in the activities a broker carries out from the time an order is
       received from a client to the time at which that order is despatched to the relevant
       trading platform and reporting back to the client. It may also be considered to
       include provision of direct access to the market through an electronic system
       managed by the broker. This might, in principle, also constitute a separate product
       market.
  24. Clearing consists in the services performed between the matching of the trade and
       the eventual settlement (if any). In essence this involves the management of risk and
       collateral during the lifetime of the contract on behalf of a client vis-à-vis the
       relevant trading platform or central clearinghouse. Clients may use different brokers
       for execution and clearing, or may self-execute6 on the trading platform but continue
       to rely on a broker for clearing. On certain markets, clearing brokers may have
       additional responsibilities related to physical delivery of the underlying.
  25. The market investigation confirmed the existence of two separate markets for
       execution and clearing of listed derivatives.
  26. In selecting a broker, numerous factors were cited by respondents to the market
       investigation as playing a role. In addition to price, these included past experience,
       reputation, financial strength, product knowledge, scope of services offered (i.e.
       range of instruments that can be traded and trading venues accessible) and in some
       cases local knowledge. The provision of a global clearing account is also considered
       important by many customers as well.
6  Often, very large traders may have direct execution access to an exchange but require a broker for
   clearing purposes.
                                                     4

27. The Commission also considered whether these services should be further sub-
    divided in either of two ways: according to underlying asset classes or according to
    the trading platform (exchange) on which the product concerned was listed.
28. In respect of a possible subdivision based on asset class of underlying, the
    Commission considered three classes of financial assets – income, equity and
    currency derivatives – as well as four classes of non-financial assets, namely energy,
    metals, agricultural commodities and carbon emissions.
29. Since customers use derivatives in part to hedge very specific risks from the demand
    side, these different types of derivatives are generally substitutable only to a very
    limited extent, if at all. Customers investing in derivatives products for investment
    purposes may consider a wider range of instruments but substitutability is likely to
    be limited since the choice of instrument depends on the individual customer's
    investment strategy.
30. On the supply side, the market investigation suggested, however, that all of the
    parties' main competitors provided brokerage services in listed derivatives based on
    all classes of underlying asset without distinction, and that there was no barrier to so
    doing provided that the membership conditions of the trading platforms where the
    various products were traded were met and that membership of the trading platform
    was a viable economic proposition.
31. Viewing the market on the basis of trading platforms (exchange), the market
    investigation suggested that, once it was a member of a given platform, there was no
    barrier to a broker offering brokerage services in respect of all instruments listed on
    that platform. However, clients wishing to trade a given contract and reliant on
    brokered access to the platform could only do so via a broker which was actually a
    member of the platform concerned. Only in limited circumstances was the same
    product, or one with an equivalent profile, traded in significant volume on more than
    one platform. This consideration suggested that supply-side substitution might only
    broaden the relevant product market to the class of instruments traded on a specific
    platform. The extent to which the market should be broadened in practice might
    therefore be a function, inter alia, of the rules of an individual platform.
32. For the purposes of the present case, it is not necessary to conclude whether
    execution brokerage services and clearing brokerage services for listed derivatives
    should be considered as separate product markets or not, since the transaction will
    not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market regardless of
    any alternative product market definition. Equally, there is no need to conclude on
    any further subdivision, on the basis of to underlying asset classes or according to
    the trading platform (exchange)
  2) Brokerage services for over-the-counter derivatives
33. Brokerage services for OTC derivatives typically involve brokers pro-actively
    searching for a counter-party to an intended trade. This is necessary when the
    instrument is tailor-made or the trade is very large in size and there is no adequate
    public source of liquidity.
34. Unlike a listed derivative, which is a standardized product, in OTC trading the
    parties themselves agree many of the key characteristics of the trade, such as the
                                                 5

       strike price, the amount of the trade as well as the conditions for collateralization and
       settlement.
  35. In this case, demand for brokerage services is driven primarily by the market
       knowledge of the brokers concerned and their consequent ability to find a
       counterparty ready to engage in the desired trade at economically favourable terms.
  36. Brokers provide this service either on the basis of pure agency or as riskless
       principal. In the latter case, the broker carries exposure to the trade throughout its
       lifetime but on a net-zero basis. In some cases, bilaterally brokered deals are given
       up to a clearinghouse for clearing.
  37. Because of the bespoke nature of the instruments brokered OTC, it is difficult to
       form a generic view as to the extent of supply substitution and therefore to formally
       exclude that there may exist products in respect of which only a few brokers are in a
       position to offer brokerage services. However, the Commission's market
       investigation did not bring to light any instances of concern.
  38. For the purposes of the present case, it is not necessary to conclude on the definition
       of what is the relevant product market for brokerage services for OTC derivatives,
       since the transaction will not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
       common market regardless of any alternative product market definition.
V.2    Relevant Geographic markets
  39. The parties argue that both relevant markets are global in scope and that no markets
       are affected.
   40. As regards the market for brokerage services in both listed and OTC financial and
       commodity derivatives, the products in which the Parties provide brokerage services,
       trade for the most part in a global market. As regards listed derivatives these trade on
       exchanges located, for the most part, in Europe and the United States, each of which
       specializes in certain classes of contract rather than in serving clients from a
       particular geographic zone. OTC products are constructed by global investment
       banks. Both classes of derivatives are principally used by global corporations for
       hedging global exposures to commodity prices and financial variables such as
       exchange rates and interest rates, and by global investors for speculating on the
       future development of these variables. The market investigation also confirmed that
       the brokerage services connected to these products are generally provided on a
       global basis.
V.2.1. Brokerage services for listed derivatives
  41. During the market investigation, the Commission examined whether a narrower
       market definition may nonetheless be appropriate in certain cases, in particular EEA-
       wide or national, since certain exchange-traded energy contracts are specific to
       European supply as are tradable carbon emissions. It therefore could not be excluded
       that the relevant geographic market might be the EU/EEA for some relevant product
       markets. Moreover, given the significant presence of both parties in France, the
       Commission also examined the possibility of any more narrow geographic market
       limited to France, where both parties have a strong presence, or for a specific
       exchange.
                                                  6

  42. The market investigation broadly confirmed that the geographic scope of the
         relevant market was global. However, for the purposes of the present case it is not
         necessary to conclude on the geographic scope of any relevant product market since
         the transaction will not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
         market regardless of any alternative geographic market definition.
V.2.1. Brokerage services for OTC derivatives
  43. During the market investigation, the Commission similarly examined whether a
         narrower geographic market definition may be appropriate in certain cases for OTC
         derivatives. The market investigation broadly confirmed that the geographic scope of
         the relevant market was likely to be global but it could not be conclusively excluded
         that for some products the scope of the market could be narrower in scope.
  44. However, for the purposes of the present case it is not necessary to conclude on the
         geographic scope of any relevant product market since the transaction will not raise
         serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market regardless of any
         alternative geographic market definition.
V.3.     Competitive Assessment.
V.3.1. Horizontal aspects
  45. In a presumed worldwide market for brokerage services for listed derivatives, the
         combined market share of the parties would be [0-5]% and Newedge would be,
         according to the parties, the 6th largest global player. If the geographic market is
         assumed to be EEA-wide, the market share of Newedge would amount to [5-10]%
         and the JV would be, according to the parties, the 2nd largest listed derivatives broker
         in the EU. Distinguishing between execution and clearing does not affect these
         conclusions materially.
  46. If the markets are looked at on a trading platform (exchange) basis, Newedge would
         have a substantial market share in one market, namely on the ICE Futures Europe
         Energy exchange, where the combined market share would be [25-35]%7, [25-35]%
         for execution and [25-35]% for clearing. . The Parties' combined share would also
         exceed 15% for both execution and clearing on one non-European exchange, the
         Singapore Exchange ([15-25]% for execution and [15-25]% for clearing), and, for
         clearing only, marginally on two others, the Osaka Exchange ([around 15]%) and the
         Sydney Futures Exchange ([around 15]%)8.
  47. The parties argue that, despite their relatively large market share on ICE Futures
         Europe, there would not be any competition concerns because large customers9
         exercise countervailing buyer power and barriers to entry and to expansion are low.
7   Calyon Financial had a share of [10-20]% and Fimat of [15-25]% in 2006.
8   In respect of these non-European markets, the market investigation showed that even if they were
    considered to be separate relevant markets for the purpose of merger control, the parties would not be able
    jointly to exercise market power.
9   Indeed, for both Fimat and Calyon a small number of customers represented around 50% of their total
    turnover in 2006.
                                                          7

       They noted that there are already 21 brokers that are members of the exchange,
       including most of the largest global actors, any of which could be used as an
       alternative by clients who in many cases already had brokerage relations with one or
       more of these competitors. They also noted that certain products traded on ICE
       Futures Europe competed head to head with similar products traded on the much
       larger New York Mercantile Exchange, NYMEX.
  48. The Commission's investigation confirmed the parties' view and also showed that
       many of the customers consulted use more than one broker. There are also a number
       of actual and potential competitors to the parties and there was no evidence, either,
       that the parties were each others' closest competitors. Customers trading on ICE
       Futures Europe did not express any significant concerns that the merger would lead
       to higher prices or a degraded quality of service.
  49. In the light of these considerations, the Commission has concluded that the
       concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
       market in respect of brokerage services for instruments trading on ICE Futures
       Europe, should the markets be looked at on a trading platform (exchange) basis.
  50. Concerning the worldwide market for brokerage services for OTC derivatives, the
       parties' combined market share would be below 1%. The market investigation did
       not suggest any possible concerns on any narrower product or geographic market
       definition.
V.3.2. Vertical aspects
  51. The Commission considered, lastly, but did not identify, any concerns in relation to
       any vertical effects caused by the proposed transaction.
VI. CONCLUSION
  52. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
       operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
       Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
       Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                      For the Commission
                                                      signed
                                                      Neelie KROES
                                                      Member of the Commission
                                                  8
