                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 12.09.1994
                                                                 MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                               ARTICLE 6(1)b DECISION
                                                                    PUBLIC VERSION
                                                              To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject:           Case No.IV/M.498 - Commercial Union/Groupe Victoire
                   Notification of 9.08.1994 pursuant to Council Regulation (EC) No. 4064/89
1.       On 9.08.94 Commercial Union plc (CU) notified to the Commission its intended
         acquisition of a major part of the life assurance activities and the general
         insurance activities of Groupe Victoire (Victoire), a large French insurance group,
         from Compagnie de Suez SA (Suez).
2.       After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
         notified operation falls within the scope of application of Council Regulation No
         4064/89 and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
         market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.       THE PARTIES
3.       CU is the holding company of the Commercial Union Group whose principal
         activities are the transaction of all classes of insurance and life insurance, other
         than industrial life, in the UK, continental Europe, North America and other
         territories throughout the world.
4.       Victoire operates in most sectors of the insurance market, almost exclusively in
         France.
Rue de la Loi - 200 B-1049 Brussels, Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11 . Fax: 2964301
Telex: COMEU B 21877 . Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

5.   Suez is a holding company with interests in the banking and financial services
     sectors and in a range of manufacturing and service enterprises.
II.  THE OPERATION
6.   CU will acquire substantially all the shares in Compagnie Financière du Groupe
     Victoire SA (CFGV), the holding company of Victoire. A number of existing
     group interests will be excluded from the scope of the acquisition by means of a
     reorganisation prior to implementation. The principal subsidiaries of CFGV are
     Abeille Vie and Abeille Assurances.
7.   Abeille Assurances operates in the non-life sector and has three small wholly-
     owned non-life insurance subsidiaries, AMIS, Assurop and La Paix Protection
     Juridique et Fiscale (La Paix). Abeille Assurances also has a reinsurance
     subsidiary, Victoire [... ] Réassurances1 (Vicaré).
8.   Abeille Vie operates in the life insurance sector. Its most significant customer is
     AFER, the Association Française d'Epargne et de Retraite, a non-profit making
     association of members which subscribes a group policy on their behalf.
9.   Victoire will also retain a controlling, majority holding in Société Foncière
     Lyonnaise (SFL), a real estate company, and in Société de Gestion et
     d'Investissement2 (SOFRAGI), a listed closed end investment fund, as well as
     minority holdings in Union Financière de France (UFF) and Compagnie
     Financière SFAC (SFAC), a holding company with insurance interests in the
     receivable risks of industrial and trading companies. The acquisition also includes
     a number of other small companies with negligible operating activities.
10.  Through the reorganisation Suez will retain a number of insurance, real estate and
     financial services business, notably La Hénin Vie, active in the life insurance
     sector, Sociéte d'Epargne Viagère (SFV) which acts as a co-insurer with Abeille
     Vie to AFER and Abeille Réassurances, a reinsurance company.
III. CONCENTRATION OF COMMUNITY DIMENSION
11.  The notified operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article
     3(1)b of the Regulation.
12.  The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in
     excess of 5000 million ECU. Both CU and Victoire have a Community-wide
     turnover in excess of 250 million ECU, but do not achieve more than two-thirds
     of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member
     State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
1
     Read "Victoire Abeille Réassurances".
2
     Read "Société Française de Gestion et d'Investissement".
                                           2

IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
    a) Relevant product markets
13. Traditionally the Commission has distinguished between life insurance, general
    insurance and reinsurance. Reinsurance constitutes a separate market because of
    its purpose of spreading risk between insurers. It is more specialised and
    conducted between insurers and reinsurers on an international basis because of the
    need to pool risks. The regulatory framework is also less stringent. This gives rise
    to different conditions of competition compared to life and general insurance.
14. On the demand side, life and non-life insurance can be divided into as many
    product markets as there are insurances covering different kinds of risk. Their
    characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and there is typically no
    substitutability for the consumer between the different risk insured. Nevertheless
    it can be left open in the present case whether each specific type of life and non-
    life insurance constitutes a separate product market because, even on the basis of
    the narrowest definition, the operation does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the common market.
    b) Geographical reference markets
15. Insurance markets are becoming more open to intra-community competition,
    particularly for industrial and comercial policies, as a result of current and future
    measures to facilitate cross-border selling. Nevertheless, geographical reference
    markets seem at present to be mainly national in view of the established market
    structures, the need for adequate distribution channels, fiscal constraints in some
    cases and differing national systems of regulatory supervision. Given the need to
    pool risks on an international basis and the conduct of reinsurance business on a
    worldwide basis, the geographical reference market for reinsurance is global.
    c) Competitive assessment
16. The proposed operation does not give rise to any affected markets. The only
    geographic area in which the operation produces any significant overlap is France.
    i) Life insurance
17. Taking the French life insurance market as a whole, the combined market share
    of the parties after the concentration will be approximately [...]3 based on 1993
    premium income. Considering individual and group policies separately, the
    respective total market shares are approximately [...]4. Abeille Vie is particularly
    strong in the product area of unit-linked savings/pensions business [...]5. Abeille
    Vie's market share is only [...]6. After the concentration CU/Victoire will remain
3
    Deleted  business  secret. Between 0 and 10%.
4
    Deleted  business  secret. Both in range of 0 to 10%.
5
    Deleted  business  secret.
6
    Deleted  business  secret. Between 10 and 20%.
                                          3

    the sixth largest player in the life insurance market in France after CNP, Prédica,
    UAP, AGF and GAN.
    ii) Non-life insurance
18. Taking the non-life market as a whole the combined market share of the parties
    based on 1993 premium income is less than [...]7. The aggregate market share for
    the various segments into which the overall non-life market may be divided, i.e.
    property damage sub-divided by individual, corprate and agricultural, health and
    accident, motor, transport, civil liability and others, is always less than 6%. After
    the concentration CU/Victoire will be the eighth largest player in the French non-
    life insurance market behind companies such as UAP, Groupama, AGF and AXA.
    iii)    Reinsurance
19. CU will acquire the Vicaré reinsurance company. Over two-thirds of Vicaré's
    1993 premium income was derived from Abeille Réassurances. The addition to
    CU's reinsurance activities is negligible in market share terms.
20. The proposed concentration will not therefore create or strengthen a dominant
    position as a result of which effective competition will be significantly impeded
    in the common market or in a substantial part of it.
V.  ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
21. The notifying parties have requested that certain restrictions be considered as
    ancillary to the concentration.
22. CU and Suez have agreed that the continuing Suez group will cease all use of the
    words 'Abeille' and 'Victoire' and the corresponding trademarks and logos, subject
    to certain residual rights in favour of Suez companies and former members of the
    Victoire Group.
23. Abeille Vie will [...]8 by UFF in order to allow it sufficient time to develop
    products for perceived niche clientele. UFF is majority owned by Banque
    Indosuez, a wholly owned subsidiary of Suez, although Victoire will retain an 11
    per cent interset in UFF. [...]9 could be considered as part of the goodwill
    attached to the purchase of Abeille Vie by CU.
24. These restrictions are necessary to guarantee the transfer to CU of the full value
    of the assets purchased or are otherwise directly related to and necessary for the
    successful implementation of the concentration. They can therefore be treated as
    ancillary to the concentration.
25. The parties have also put in place various other arrangements intended to facilitate
    the implementation of the concentration. These are that Banque Indosuez will
7
    Deleted business secret. Between 0 and 10%.
8
    Deleted business secret.
9
    Deleted business secret.
                                           4

        continue to provide custody services in respect of securities held for Victoire and
        will subsequently remain one of the major counterparties of Victoire in certain
        transactions and will continue to manage the fund generated by the sale of certain
        Abeille Vie products; Victoire will continue to distribute specific consumer credit
        products created by Banque Sofino, another Suez subsidiary; and AMIS, a
        subsidiary of Abeille Assurances, will sell health products through Banque
        Sofinco. These arrangements last for different periods.
26.     Although they are linked to the concentration, none of these arrangements confers
        exclusivity on any party to it or creates any other form of restriction of
        competition. They are thus not ancillary restraints falling within the meaning of
        Article 8(2) of the Regulation.
VI.     CONCLUSION
27.     For the foregoing reasons, the proposed concentration does not raise serious
        doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning
        of the EEA Agreement.
                                             *
                                           *   *
For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the
EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
Regulation No. 4064/89.
                                                        For the Commission
                                             5
