                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 28.10.1994
                                                                           MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)b DECISION
                                                                       PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                        To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject:         Case N° IV/M.508 - BHF/CCF (II)
                 Your notification of 29.9.1994 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
                 Regulation N° 4064/89
1. On 29 September 1994 Crédit Commercial de France S.A. (CCF) and Berliner
    Handels- und Frankfurter Bank (BHF) notified an operation by which they will
    acquire joint control of CCF Finanziaria SpA and CCF Finanzas SA - two small
    financial institutions established in Italy and Spain respectively which were prior to
    the notified operation exclusively controlled by CCF.
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the proposed
    operation falls within the scope of the Council Regulation No 4064/89 and does not
    raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the
    functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I. THE OPERATION AND THE PARTIES
3. CCF and BHF acting through a jointly controlled vehicle, European Corporate
    Financial Holding (ECFH) will acquire a 60% shareholding in two subsidiaries of
    CCF, CCF Finanziaria (Italy) and CCF Finanzas (Spain). CCF will retain a 20%
    shareholding in each company and the remaining 20% is to be acquired by
Rue de la Loi - 200 B-1049 Brussels, Belgium - Office: ...........
Telephone: direct line (+32-2)29....... exchange 299.11.11 . Fax: 2964301
Telex: COMEU B 21877 . Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

     Charterhouse Bank Ltd (Charterhouse) which is itself jointly controlled by BHF and
     CCF1.
4. BHF is a German bank whose main activities are commercial banking and financial
     services. CCF is a French bank whose main activities are commercial and retail
     banking. CCF Finanziaria and CCF Finanzas are existing undertakings engaged in
     providing mergers and acquisitions advice in Italy and Spain respectively.
III.    CONCENTRATION
5. CCF Finanziaria and CCF Finanzas will be controlled by ECFH which will own the
     majority of the share capital and voting rights in both companies. ECFH is a holding
     company established as vehicle for BHF and CCF to acquire jointly corporate finance
     businesses outside their domestic markets. Consequently, CCF Finanziaria and CCF
     Finanzas will be jointly controlled by BHF and CCF.
6. CCF Finanziaria and CCF Finanzas are existing enterprises which have the personnel
     and the basic facilities to perform in the field of mergers and acquisitions advice
     services all the functions of autonomous economic entities on a long term basis. On
     the other hand it is very unlikely that the notified operation will give rise to
     coordination between the parent companies since neither of the parents are active on
     the geographic markets of the joint ventures (see paragraphs 10 and 11 below).
7. Therefore, the joint acquisition of CCF Finanziaria and CCF Finanzas by BHF and
     CCF is a concentration as the joint ventures are full-function autonomous economic
     entities performing on a lasting basis and there is no coordination of the competitive
     behaviour of the undertakings concerned.
III.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8. The enterprises concerned had in 1993 a combined aggregate worldwide turnover,
     calculated in accordance with Article 5(3)(a) of the Merger Regulation, in excess of
     5,000 million ECU (one-tenth of total assets of CCF 4,998 million ECU and of BHF
     3,030 million ECU). Both BHF and CCF have a Community-wide turnover in excess
     of 250 million ECU and do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
     Community-wide turnover in one and the same Member State. The operation
     therefore has a Community dimension.
IV.     COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
9. M &A advice is a services activity which consists on advising companies on public
     bids and defences as well as on private company sales and purchases.
1
     See Case n° IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
                                              2

10.   Although many M & A transactions are cross-border, it is important to distinguish
      the activity, which may be international in scope from the service provided which
      is national in scope. The national character of M & A advice services results from
      a number of factors such as the need for detailed knowledge of local corporate law
      and business structures, accounting rules, regulatory regimes and market practices2.
      In practice, the provision of M & A advice services generally requires that the
      principal advisor should be physically established in the country where the target
      company is situated. Therefore, the relevant geographic markets in the present case
      are the Italian and Spanish M & A advice services markets in which the two J.Vs
      are established.
11.   As a result of the present operation, CCF withdraws from the Spanish and Italian
      M&A advice services markets, apart from its interests in the two jointly controlled
      subsidiaries. Furthermore, the parent companies, BHF and CCF, have agreed that
      neither of them nor any of their subsidiaries shall be or remain engaged in M &
      A advice services in a country in which a jointly controlled subsidiary is carrying
      out the same kind of activity. Therefore the present operation will not result in any
      addition of market shares in the relevant geographic markets, Italy and Spain.
12.   Both CCF Finanziaria and CCF Finanzas are very small undertakings. CCF
      Finanziaria achieved in 1993 a total turnover of less than [...]3 ECUs and employed
      6 persons only. CCF Finanzas is even smaller as its turnover did not exceed [...]3
      ECUs in 1993 and it had only 3 employees. The most important players in the
      Italian and Spanish M & A advice markets are local financial institutions such as
      Mediobanca and Euromobiliare in Italy and Banco de Santander, Banco Bilbao
      Vizcaya and Mercapital in Spain. In both countries there is also a large number
      of other players including major international investment banks such as, for
      example, J. P. Morgan, Morgan Stanley, and the Swiss Bank Corporation in Italy
      and Goldman Sachs, Solomon Brothers, J. P. Morgan and Morgan Grenfell in
      Spain.
V. CONCLUSION
13.   The Commission has decided for the above reasons not to oppose the notified
      operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
      functioning of the EEA agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
      Article 6(1)b of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and article 57 of the EEA
      agreement.
                                                                        For the Commission
2
    See Case n° IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
3
    Amount deleted - business secret.
                                            3
