                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 7.11.1994
                                                              PUBLIC VERSION
                                                              MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                              ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                            To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.512 - UAP/Provincial
              Notification of 30.09.1994 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     The above mentioned notification concerns the agreement signed on 29th September 1994
       whereby Rockleigh Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of the insurance Group UAP,
       acquires the entire issued share capital of a number of businesses of the insurance and
       financial services Provincial Group.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of application of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and does
       not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                                 2-
I.   THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
3.   Compagnie UAP (UAP) is a French insurance company with worlwide operataions. It is
     particularly strong in Europe. It is also engaged in banking and financial services, in
     particular through its wholly owned French subsidiary banque Worms and through the
     Belgian bank Ippa. The principal activities of Provincial Group are non-life insurance,
     mortgage finance and management services, principally in the United Kingdom although it
     has some minor activities in Africa, Asia and Australasia.
4.   The business being acquired form substantially the whole of the activities of Provincial
     Group. These are Provincial Insurance plc, Provincial Management Services, Exeter Trust
     (Holdings) Limited, Provincial Leasing Co. Ltd and certain properties of Sand Aire
     Properties Limited. Most of the worldwide turnover of the Provincial Group comes from its
     non-life insurance activities.
II.  CONCENTRATION
5.   The notified operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)b of the
     Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in excess of
     5.000 million ECU. Both UAP and Provincial Group have a Community-wide turnover in
     excess of 250 million ECU but do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
     Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation
     therefore has a Community dimension.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
A.   THE RELEVANT PRODUCT AND GEOGRAPHICAL MARKET
7.   Traditionally the Commission has distinguished between life insurance, general insurance
     and reinsurance. Reinsurance constitutes a separate market because of its purpose of
     spreading risk between insurers. It is more specialised and conducted between insurers and
     reinsurers on an international basis because of the need to pool risks. The regulatory
     framework is also less stringent. This gives rise to different conditions of competition
     compared to life and general insurance.
8.   On the demand side, life and general insurance can be divided into as many product markets
     as there are insurances covering different kinds of risk. Their characteristics, premiums and
     purposes are distinct and there is typically no substitutability for the consumer between the
     different risk insured. Nevertheless it can be left open in the present case whether each
     specific type of life and non-life insurance constitutes a separate product market because,
     even on the basis of the narrowest definition, the operation does not raise serious doubts as to
     its compatibility with the common market.
9.   Although insurance markets are becoming more open to intra-community competition as a
     result of current and future measures to facilitate cross-border selling, geographical markets
     seem at present to be mainly national in view of the established market structures, the need
     for adequate distribution channels, fiscal constraints in some cases and differing national
     systems of regulatory supervision.

                                                   3-
B.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
10. The only current area of overlap in the business of UAP and Provincial Group is non life
      insurance in the UK. Neither Provincial Group nor any of its subsidiaries carries on life
      insurance. Provincial Group is the UK's 13th largest non-life insurance company and it has
                          (1)
      approximately [ ] of the non-life business in the UK. UAP currently has minimal non-life
      insurance activities in the UK. Even though Provincial Group is present to a minimal extent
      in the banking and financial services business, its activities do not overlap with the UAP's.
      Reinsurance activities of Provincial Group are to be considered negligible. The new entity
      will remain exposed to the competition of other strong operators well established in the
      United Kingdom such as General Accident, Commercial Union Royal, Sun Alliance, etc.
      Given the degree of existing competition and the low barriers to entry to this business, the
      merged entity will not have power to dominate the market or act independently of
      competitors and consumers.
11. The proposed concentration will therefore not create or strengthen a dominant position as a
      result of which effective competition will be significantly impeded in the common market or
      in a substantial part of it.
V.    ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
12. The notifying parties have requested that certain provisions be considered as restrictions
      ancillary to the concentration.
13. First, there are provisions relating to the period between the date of the agreement and the
      completion of the transaction (Clause 8 and Schedule 7). During that period Provincial
      Group will not conduct its business except in the ordinary course and will not enter into
      transactions inconsistent with the merger without the consent of UAP.
14. Secondly, Provincial Group agrees (Clause 9, Restrictions on Seller's business activities) on
      its own behalf and on behalf of its present or future subsidiaries whilst they are members of
      the Group:
(i) for a period of five years from completion, not to compete with the acquired business;
(ii) not to disclose or use confidential business information whilst such information remains
      confidential;
(iii) not to use certain names, logos, designs, marks and trading styles;
(iv) not to solicit customers or employees for a period of two years after completion;
(v) not to hold itself out as being in any way associated with any member of the Acquired
      Business.
15. Thirdly, Provincial Group agrees (Clause 15) that for a certain period after completion it
      will not make distributions above a certain amount to its shareholders or redeem or reduce its
      share capital, rearrange, consolidate or reconstruct its corporate structure or carry out certain
      other activities which may reduce its asset value.
16. Protection by law of a general term such as "Provincial", which forms only part of the name
      of any of the companies concerned and is in common use among insurers, is much more
      limited. An indefinite restriction on the use of such a name exceeds what is necessary to
      guarantee the value of the assets transferred and can be considered ancillary to the
(1)
         Business secret deleted. Less than 5%.

                                                  4-
     concentration for a period of five years only. To the extent to which as the other provisions
     set out above constitute restrictions on competition, they are necessary to guarantee the
     transfer to UAP of the full value of the assets purchased or are otherwise directly related to
     and necessary for the successful implementation of the concentration. They can therefore be
     treated as ancillary to the concentration.
VI. CONCLUSION
17. For the foregoing reasons, the proposed concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its
     compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
                                                  *
                                                *     *
For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and to
declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                           For the Commission,
