                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                  Brussels, 15-IX-2008
                                                                  SG-Greffe(2008) D/205443
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article                          PUBLIC VERSION
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are                      MERGER PROCEDURE
shown thus […]. Where possible the information                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
 To the notifying party 1
 Dear Sir/Madam,
 Subject:       Case No COMP/M.5293 - Banco Santander/ Alliance & Leicester
                Notification of a concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                (EC) No 139/2004 2
 1.   On 8 August 2008, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
      by which the undertaking Banco Santander, S.A ("Banco Santander", Spain) acquires
      control of the whole of the undertaking Alliance & Leicester plc ("A&L", UK) by way
      of a scheme of arrangement and exchange of shares.
 2.   After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
      operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No 139/2004 and does not raise
      serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the EEA
      Agreement.
 I.    THE PARTIES
 3.   Banco Santander is active in retail banking, asset management, corporate and
      investment banking, treasury and insurance. It is organised in three main business
      areas: retail banking, wholesale banking (for large companies, institutional investors
      and international financial institutions) and asset management and insurance. Banco
 1   This decision contains information which is confidential as against the notifying party. Accordingly, and
     with the consent of that party as well as of the entity furnishing the confidential information, it is being
     sent to the external legal representative only.
 2   OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
 Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

     Santander is the parent company and exercises sole control over a UK bank, Abbey
     National plc ("Abbey"), which it acquired in 2006.
4.   A&L provides financial services in the UK for personal and commercial customers and
     has two main business areas, retail banking (personal customers) and commercial
     banking (business customers). In respect of the main banking services, Santander's
     existing activities through Abbey are substantially similar to those of the acquired
     business.
II.   THE OPERATION
5.   The proposed transaction consists in the acquisition by Banco Santander of 100% of
     A&L shares by means of a scheme of arrangement and exchange of shares.
III. CONCENTRATION
6.    Following implementation of the transaction, Banco Santander will acquire sole
      ownership and control of A&L. Therefore the transaction constitutes a concentration
      within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.   The undertakings concerned had a combined aggregate worldwide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 000 million (Santander: €66 360 million; A&L: €7 064 million) and each
     of them had a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million in 2007
     (Santander: […]; A&L: €7 064 million) 3 . The Parties do not both achieve more than
     two thirds of their Community-wide turnover in one and the same Member State.
     Therefore, the present transaction has a Community dimension pursuant to Article 1(2)
     of the Merger Regulation.
V.    RELEVANT PRODUCT AND GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS
8.   In previous decisions 4 the Commission has notably considered the following relevant
     product and geographic markets in the banking sector 5 .
3   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25).
4   See e.g. Case No COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO ASSETS, Commission decision of 3 October
    2007
5   Leaving aside specialized markets such as leasing services, private banking, asset management, consumer
    credit and payment transaction processing. These are not affected markets in the present case as the
    Parties' activities in these areas do not materially overlap,
                                                             2

(i) Retail Banking
9.    In respect of banking services for natural persons, the following segments have been
      considered in previous Commission decisions, whilst leaving open the question of
      whether such segments constitute separate product markets: current accounts, savings,
      personal loans, mortgages and distribution of mutual funds and other investment
      products. All markets have been considered national in scope 6 .
(ii) Banking for corporate customers
10. In respect of corporate banking, the Commission has, in the past, distinguished between
      Small and Medium-sized Enterprises customers ("SME customers") and Large
      Commercial Customers ("LCCs") which in respect of core banking services – i.e.
      domestic payments, international payments, savings, loans, documentary credits, export
      financing and cash management services – in one case was considered to give rise to
      separate product markets 7 . In addition, with respect to SME customers the various
      segments listed have also been considered, leaving open the question whether they
      constitute separate product markets 8 . The markets for SME customers have been
      defined as national while for LCCs the question on whether the market(s) for these
      services are national or wider has been left open.
11. The parties also indicate that according to the Competition Commission (UK), the
      market for SME customers has been split into four markets: liquidity management
      services, general purpose business loans, other types of business loans to SME
      customers and other business deposit accounts held by SME customers. Moreover, for
      liquidity management services and general purpose business loans three separate
      geographic markets have been defined (England/Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland)
      whereas for "other types of business loans" and "other business deposit accounts" the
      market has been defined as the UK as a whole.
(iii) Factoring
12. Factoring has been defined by the Commission as a separate relevant product market
      with a national dimension 9 .
6    The segment of banking services for natural persons may also, depending on the specifics of commercial
     practice in the individual markets, include services relating to the business banking needs of sole traders,
     members of the professions and micro-undertakings.
7    M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO ASSETS, recital 16.
8    M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO ASSETS and Case No COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito/HVB, Commission
     decision of 18 October 2005.
9    Cases No. COMP/M.2577 GE Capital/Heller Financial, Commission Decision of 23 October 2001,
     recitals 9 through 11 and 17; COMP/M.3894 Unicredito/HVB, recital 42;
                                                            3

(iv) Payment cards
13. Within the market for payment cards, at least two separate markets have been
     previously considered: (1) card issuing, split into credit/deferred debit and immediate
     debit cards and alternatively between private and corporate cards, and (2) card
     acquiring. A distinction by scheme or scope of scheme has also been considered.
     However, the final definition of these markets for merger control purposes has been left
     open. The issuing markets have been considered to be national in scope whereas the
     geographic scope of the acquiring markets has been left open in respect of international
     payment cards 10 .
(v) Financial market services
14. Financial market services include a broad range of services such as trading in securities,
     bonds, derivatives, foreign exchange and money market instruments, and the
     Commission has left open the question whether these segments constitute separate
     product markets. The market has normally been considered wider than national in
     scope, although in some cases an assessment at national basis has been carried out 11 .
(vi) Insurance sector
15. The insurance sector has been previously segmented into three main areas: life
     insurance, non-life insurance and reinsurance, leaving, in most cases, open the question
     of whether further segments according to the kinds of risks covered constitute separate
     product markets. In addition, the distribution of these products by third parties has also
     been looked at as potentially a separate market 12 . From the geographic point of view,
     life insurance and most forms of non-life insurance have been considered as national
     markets, whereas reinsurance and the insurance of shipping and other large risks has
     been considered international in scope 13 .
(vii) Cash handling and sales
16. In addition, A&L is active in the provision of certain money transmission services for
     corporate customers, in respect of which there is, in the present case, a vertical
     relationship between A&L and Abbey. These services are in particular "cash handling"
     and "cash sales". The Commission has in the past 14 defined the market for "cash in
10  Cases No. COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABM AMRO ASSETS, recitals 42 through 60 and 87; COMP/M.3740
    Barclays Bank/Föreningssparbanken/JV, Commission Decision of 2 June 2005, recital 16;
    COMP/M.2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot, Commission decision of 8 November 2001, recital 37
11  Case No. COMP/M.3894 Unicredito/HVB, recital 42
12  Cases No. COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV, Commission Decision of 17 June 2008
    (publication pending); COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABM AMRO ASSETS, recitals 71 to 74.
13  See most recently Vienna Insurance Group/Erste Bank Versicherungssparte, Commission Decision of 17
    June 2008.
14  Case No. COMP/M.3396 - Group 4 Falck / Securicor, Commission decision of 28 May 2004.
                                                      4

    transit" ("CIT"), distinguishing it from cash handling services 15 , but did not specifically
    assess the markets for cash handling and cash sales.
17. Cash handling consists in sorting and crediting customer accounts for the value of
    physical cash (notes and coins) delivered by customers, in the case of A&L, to cash
    centres or Post Office counters. Other companies provide similar services whilst some
    banks self-supply or outsource the service. The scope of the service offered may also
    extend to cheques and other bearer means of payment.
18. In the present case, Abbey outsources its cash handling to A&L, meaning that notes and
    coins deposited by Abbey customers at its branches are sorted by A&L which credits
    Abbey with the value of the funds collected.
19. The parties submit that the geographic scope of this market is national, i.e. the whole of
    the UK, although they recognise that there are some companies providing these services
    only at regional level. The geographic scope of the market is unlikely to be wider than
    national in this case given, in particular, that these services relate overwhelmingly or
    exclusively to national currency, i.e. pounds sterling.
20. In the present case, however, it is not necessary to conclude as to the precise scope of
    the relevant product and geographic markets as serious doubts do not arise as to the
    compatibility of the notified transaction with the common market regardless of the
    exact product and geographic market definitions.
21. Cash sales consist in the provision of cash to corporate customers, financial institutions
    (such as Abbey) and ATM deployers (both bank-owned ATMs and ATMs operated by
    independent operators). The parties submit that the geographic market is Great Britain
    or the UK given that most suppliers are active nationally, prices are set on a national
    basis, it is not necessary to own cash depots to cover a specific area since the Post
    Office counters and/or other cash centre services providers can be used instead, and
    there is no geographic break in the areas of coverage.
22. As the provision of cash to ATM operators may have specific characteristics as regards
    the sorting and packaging of banknotes, the Parties have provided data also on market
    shares in this possible segment of the market, in which A&L is somewhat stronger than
    in the cash sales market as a whole. Abbey is not active in this market but is a customer
    of A&L.
23. The parties submit that the geographic scope of this market is national, i.e. the whole of
    the UK, although they recognise that there are some companies providing these services
    only at regional level. The geographic scope of the market is unlikely to be wider than
    national in this case given, in particular, that these services relate overwhelmingly or
    exclusively to national currency, i.e. pounds sterling.
24. In the present case, however, it is not necessary to conclude as to the precise scope of
    the relevant product and geographic markets as serious doubts do not arise as to the
    compatibility of the notified transaction with the common market regardless of the
    exact product and geographic market definitions.
15 Case NO. COMP/M.3396 - Group 4 Falck / Securicor, recital 14.
                                                   5

VI. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
25. The proposed transaction does not give rise to affected markets due to horizontal
    overlaps. The possible markets for cash sales and/or the possible narrower market for
    cash sales to ATM operators in the UK are technically affected markets due to vertical
    links but, as discussed below, this situation is not expected to persist post-merger or to
    lead to competitive concerns.
26. With respect to horizontal overlaps, the parties' overlaps give rise to combined market
    shares below 15% in all cases: (i) in retail banking, the combined market shares range
    between [5-10%] and [10-20%] in any possible segment, (ii) in corporate banking to
    SME customers, the market shares range between [0-5%] and [5-10%] (also at regional
    level when applicable) in any possible segment; for LCCs the combined market shares
    are below [5]% as a whole and in any possible segment; (iii) in factoring, the combined
    market share is around [0-5%]; (iv) in payment cards: combined market shares are [0-
    5]% for credit cards and [10-20]% for debit cards; (v) financial market services: the
    combined market shares are below [5]% for the overall market and below [5]% in any
    possible segment thereof; (vi) insurance sector: the combined market shares are below
    [5]% both for life and nonlife insurance, and below [10]% in any possible segment of
    these markets, except for mortgage insurance in which the combined market share is
    [10-20]%.
27. In cash handling and cash sales, only A&L is present pre-merger and therefore there is
    no horizontal overlap. With respect to the vertical relationships, the market shares of
    A&L in cash handling and cash sales and the market structure of these markets are not
    indicative of competitive problems.
28. In the market for cash handling, A&L's market share is around [20-30] 16 , other
    important competitors being RBS, Barclays, HSBC and Lloyds TSB with market shares
    estimated at [20-30]%, [10-20]%, [10-20]% and [5-10]% respectively 17 . This market is
    therefore not vertically affected 18 .
29. In the market for cash sales, A&L's […] market share is [20-30% following adjustments
    needed to take account of the status of current contracts] 19 (the current market share
    would be [30-40]% if the market is further restricted to sales to ATM operators 20 ). The
    Abbey contract, which represents a further significant portion of the remaining market
    share, will also be internalized by the merger. A&L submits that this market share is,
    moreover, overstated since the APACS Payments Market Report for 2008 (source of
    data) understates the size of the segment as only total cash withdrawn from ATMs is
16 Source: APACS Payment Market Report 2008 (for the market size); A&L for its own sales (information
   confidential as against the notifying party)
17 Source: estimates furnished by A&L (information confidential as against the notifying party)
18 Commission Regulation (EC) No. 802/2004 of 7 April 2004, Annex 1, Section 6, Point III(b), OJEU
   L133 of 30 April 2004, p. 16
19 Source: APACS Payment Market Report 2008 (for the market size); A&L for its own sales (information
   confidential as against the notifying party).
20 Source: A&L. Information confidential as against the notifying party.
                                                        6

    considered, excluding over-the-counter transactions. In addition, even if the market is
    split between cash sales for ATMs and for non-ATMs, the adjusted market shares still
    would be below [20-30]% in both cases 21 . Other competitors are RBS, HSBC and
    Barclays, with estimated market shares of [20-30]%, [20-30]% and [10-20]%
    respectively 22 .
30. A&L estimates that the above market shares would not be higher on a regional level.
31. Given the small combined market shares that the transaction will bring about and the
    limited impact that the vertical relationships have on the market for cash sales, the
    Commission has concluded that the proposed transaction does not give rise to serious
    doubts as to its compatibility with the common market under any alternative product
    and geographic market definition. This is consistent with the fact that no third parties
    have raised concerns with the Commission during the notification period.
State Aid issues
32. In the context of the proposed merger, two different aspects of Spanish tax law which
    might constitute aid within the meaning of Article 87(1) of the EC Treaty and from
    which Santander may benefit on the occasion of the acquisition of A&L, ought to be
    considered. First, the ability for companies purchasing shareholdings in foreign
    companies directly to offset up to 15% of the price paid against tax to the extent to
    which the purchase leads to increased export activities. 23 The parties have confirmed
    that Santander will not benefit from this measure since this scheme does not consider
    financial and insurance companies as directly related with export activities. Secondly,
    the possibility under Spanish legislation to amortize part of the financial goodwill when
    Spanish companies acquire significant shareholdings in foreign companies, leading to a
    reduction of the taxes paid and which might constitute a state aid 24 . […]
33. In any event, it is not clear whether such subsidies would be compatible with the
    common market. Therefore, the Commission is not in a position to take into account the
    possible effects of such measures in this Decision. Any possible effects of these
    measures on competition will therefore have to be taken into account in the course of a
    possible State Aid assessment by the Commission. It should be added that the
    assessment of this case for the purposes of Council Regulation No. 139/2004 would not
    have been affected even by a possible qualification as incompatible state aid. This
    Decision does not prejudice the outcome of a possible Commission investigation under
    the State aid rules.
21 Information confidential as against the notifying party
22 Source: estimates furnished by A&L (information confidential as against the notifying party)
23 The Commission has, on 22 March 2006, declared this scheme incompatible with the common market and
   requested Spain to gradually repeal it by 2010. Spain amended its national legislation as requested by the
   Commission. Proposal of appropriate measures under article 88(1) EC on the aid scheme implemented
   by Spain in the form of direct tax incentives in favour of export related investments - Aid E 22/2004 ex NN
   13/2004; Commission press release IP/06/355. Both available on the Commission website
24 On 10 October 2007 the Commission informed Spain of its decision to initiate a procedure pursuant to
   Article 88(2) of the EC Treaty. No final decision has yet been taken.
                                                           7

VI. CONCLUSION
34. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC)
    No 139/2004.
                                                    For the Commission
                                                    (Signed)
                                                    Neelie KROES
                                                    Member of the Commission
                                               8
