                           COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 12.01.95
                                                                 MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                               ARTICLE 6(1)b DECISION
                                                                    PUBLIC VERSION
                                                              Registered with advice of delivery
                                                              To the notifying parties.
Dear Sirs,
Subject:        Case No.IV/M.520 -DIRECT LINE/BANKINTER.
                Notification of 2.12.1994 pursuant to Council Regulation (EC) No. 4064/89
1.       The above mentioned notification concerns the agreement signed on 24th
         November 1994 between Direct Line Group Limited (Direct Line), a wholly-
         owned subsidiary of The Royal Bank of Scotland, and Bankinter, S.A.
         (Bankinter) whereby the parties acquire joint control of Bankinter Aseguradora
         Directa, S.A., Compañía de Seguros y Reaseguros (Bankinter Direct), a newly
         established insurance company.
2.       After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
         notified operation falls within the scope of application of Council Regulation No
         4064/89 and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
         common market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
Rue de la Loi - 200 B-1049 Brussels, Belgium -
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11 . Fax: 2964301
Telex: COMEU B 21877 . Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                          2
I.  THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
3.  Direct Line is a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Royal Bank of Scotland. It
    concentrates its activities on motor and household insurance marketed by direct
    telephone sales in the UK. Other minor activities of the group include personal
    loans and mortgages and, in the near future, income protection products and term
    assurance.
4.  Bankinter is a medium size independent Spanish banking group active in
    commercial and investment banking and related activities. It also offers life
    insurance and insurance bokerage to a very limited extent.
5.  Bankinter Direct will be a joint venture vehicle which will offer motor and
    household insurance policies in Spain and, subsequently, in Portugal, by direct
    telephone sales. It is currently a wholly-owned subsidiary of Bankinter and does
    not yet carry out any business. At completion of the transaction Direct Line will
    acquire a 50% share holding in Bankinter Direct by acquisition of shares from
    Bankinter. Further to the joint venture agreement, Direct Line will grant exclusive
    licences and technology. A services agreement is to be signed whereby Bankinter
    will provide technical and administrative sevices to Bankinter Direct.
II. CONCENTRATION
6.  Bankinter Direct will be a jointly controlled joint venture performing, on a lasting
    basis, all of the functions of an autonomous economic entity. Direct Line and
    Bankinter will each hold 50 % of the shares and equal voting rights in Bankinter
    Direct. The board of Bankinter Direct shall consist of eight members, four
    appointed by each party. A number of matters will require the unanimous
    approval of the board of Bankinter Direct, including business plans and business
    expansion into Portugal, expansion into other insurance segments, acquisitions and
    disposals above certain thresholds.
7.  The joint venture will not give rise to the coordination of competitive behaviour
    of Direct Line and Bankinter, since those companies are neither actual nor
    potential competitors. There is no overlap between the parties' business. They are
    active in different markets, Direct Line in motor and household insurance in the
    U.K., Bankinter in banking and life insurance in Spain (see below on relevent
    product and geographic markets section IV.A). The joint venture, Bankinter
    Direct, will be active on a separate geographic market (Spain) from Direct Line
    (UK), and in a separate product market from Bankinter. As regards the banking
    activities of The Royal Bank of Scotland and Bankinter, the risk of coordination
    of competitive behaviour is to be considered negligeable since their activities are
    carried out on separate geographical markets. The notified operation therefore
    constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)b of the Regulation.

                                           3
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8.   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in
     excess of 5.000 million ECU. Both Royal Bank of Scotland and Bankinter have
     a Community-wide turnover in excess of 250 million ECU but do not achieve
     more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and
     the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community
     dimension.
IV.  COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
A.   THE RELEVANT PRODUCT AND GEOGRAPHICAL MARKET
9.   The operation concerns the marketing of motor and household insurance policies
     in the Spain and Portugal by direct telephone sales. In previous decisions the
     Commission has distinguished between life insurance, general insurance and
     reinsurance. Reinsurance constitutes a separate market because of its purpose of
     spreading risk between insurers.
10.  Life and general insurance, such as motor and household insurance, can be
     divided into as many product markets as there are insurances covering different
     kinds of risk. Their characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and there
     is typically no substitutability for the consumer between the different risks
     insured.
11.  Although insurance markets are becoming more open to intra-community
     competition as a result of current and future measures to facilitate cross-border
     selling, geographical markets seem at present to be mainly national in view of the
     established market structures, the need for adequate distribution channels, fiscal
     constraints in some cases and differing national systems of regulatory supervision.
     However, the exact product and geographic market definitions may be left open
     since, even the narrowest definition, the proposed operation does not pose
     competition problems (see below, section IV.B.)
B.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
12.  The operation will not create any overlap in the non-life insurance sector in
     which the joint venture intends to operate. The new type of distribution channel,
     direct sales by telephone, has made Direct Line UK's biggest private car insurer
     with a market share of approximately 10% by value. Further Direct Line has won
     approximately 2% of the household insurance segment. This position will not be
     changed by the present operation since the Bankinter Direct is not going to be
     present in the UK.

                                            4
13. The transaction will not adversely affect competition in the segments of car and
    household insurance in Spain and Portugal in which none of the parties is
    currently active. The markets are relatively fragmented and the new entity will
    remain exposed to the competition of other strong well established operators.
14. Given the degree of existing competition and the low barriers to entry to this
    business, the new entity will not create or strengthen a dominant position as a
    result of which effective competition will be significantly impeded in the common
    market or in a substantial part of it.
V.  ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
15. The notifying parties have requested that certain restrictions be considered as
    ancillary to the concentration:
          (i)   The area of the operation of the joint venture will be restricted to Spain
                and Portugal. The joint venture is prevented from using Direct Line's
                licences and technology [...]1.
          (ii)  The parties agree not to compete or to enter into any other venture
                which conflicts with [...]2.
          (iii) Bankinter is prevented from seeking to register any trade mark or other
                intellectual property right that is the same or substantially similar to
                certain intellectual property rights licensed under the technology and
                trade mark licences.
    Insofar as these clauses are restrictive, they are necessary and directly related to
    the successful implementation of the concentration. They can therefore be treated
    as ancillary to the concentration.
16. Direct Line is prevented from making its systems and other expertise in the fields
    of [...]3. This restriction is necessary and directly related to the initial setting up
    of the 'Bankinter Direct' joint venture and can therefore be treated as ancillary to
    the concentration for a period of [...]4 years from its inception.
17. [...]5
1
    deleted - business secret
2
    deleted - business secret
3
    business secret : not exceeding 5 years
4
    deleted : business secret
5
    deleted - business secret

                                        5
VI. CONCLUSION
18. For the foregoing reasons the proposed concentration does not raise serious doubts
    as to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of the
    EEA Agreement.
                                        *
                                    *        *
    For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
    functioning of the EEA agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
    Article 6(1)b of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and article 57 of the EEA
    Agreement.
                                                                For the Commission
