                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 17.12.2008
                                                                 C(2008)8753
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2008) D/208327
  In the published version of this decision, some
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                      PUBLIC VERSION
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                 MERGER PROCEDURE
  general description.                                             ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                 To the notifying parties:
Dear Sirs,
Subject:        COMP/M.5363 – SANTANDER / BRADFORD&BINGLEY ASSETS
                Notification of 12 November 2008 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
                Regulation No 139/2004 1
1.    On 12 November 2008, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
      concentration by which the undertaking Abbey National plc ("Abbey", UK), which
      is a wholly owned subsidiary of Banco Santander, S.A. ("Santander", Spain)
      acquires control of certain assets, formerly part of the undertaking Bradford and
      Bingley plc ("B&B", UK), by virtue of a statutory order in return for a net
      consideration in cash. The assets transferred and the terms of the transaction are
      detailed further below.
I.    THE PARTIES
2.    Santander is the parent company of an international group of banking and financial
      companies operating in the UK, Spain and some other European countries as well as
      in Latin America. It is active in retail banking, asset management, corporate and
      investment banking, treasury and insurance. It is organised in three main business
      areas: retail banking, wholesale banking (for large companies, institutional investors
      and international financial institutions) and asset management and insurance.
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

3.   Abbey is a subsidiary of Santander which was acquired in 2004. Abbey offers a full
     range of personal financial services in the UK, including current and savings
     accounts, loans, credit cards, mortgages, investments and pension products. It also
     offers corporate banking services to both SMEs and large corporate customers
     (LCCs), financial market services, and distributes third party insurance products.
4.   B&B offered, prior to the transaction, and almost exclusively in the UK, a range of
     personal financial services including savings accounts, loans, mortgages and
     financial planning.
5.   The assets acquired by Abbey (the "Transferred Assets") are as follows:
     a.   all retail savings account deposits made with B&B (the "B&B deposits");
     b.   the issued shares of Bradford & Bingley International Limited, a deposit-taking
          institution incorporated and authorized in the Isle of Man;
     c.   all freehold and leasehold property of B&B, including all branches, agencies
          and call centers, and;
     d.   all contracts and arrangements, intellectual and personal property relating to the
          retail savings accounts business of B&B, subject to certain specified exceptions.
6.   In addition, the contracts of employment of those employees of B&B whose work
     relates wholly or mainly to the savings account business of B&B were transferred to
     Abbey, as well as 47 mortgage advisors.
7.   The rump B&B has been put into liquidation and its remaining assets (the "Retained
     Assets") transferred to the State. These assets notably include all existing mortgages,
     securities and wholesale borrowing and lending businesses.
8.   Alliance and Leicester plc ("A&L", UK) is a company which was acquired, and is
     now solely controlled, by Santander by virtue of a transaction which closed on 10
     October 2008. The acquisition was authorized by the Commission on
     15 September 2008. 2 A&L provides financial services in the UK for personal and
     commercial customers and has two main business areas, retail banking (personal
     customers) and commercial banking (business customers). In respect of the main
     banking services, Santander's activities through Abbey are substantially similar to
     those of A&L. In order correctly to represent the current market position of
     Santander, the figures taken for basis of the analysis in this decision include the
     activities of A&L in the relevant period, notwithstanding that it was not, at that date,
     controlled by Santander.
II. THE CONCENTRATION
9.   The proposed transaction consists in the acquisition by Santander of the Transferred
     Assets, by means of statutory order pursuant to the Banking (Special Provisions) Act
     England and Wales 2008, for a net consideration of 612 million pounds sterling.
2   See case COMP/M.5293 Santander/Alliance & Leicester.
                                                  2

     B&B's past mortgage business, which continues to generate cash flow, has been
     retained in public ownership.
10. The part of the B&B business not acquired by Santander, i.e. the Retained Assets,
     may be considered to represent financial assets only. Such assets do not generate
     new business and do not result in a change in the structure of the market.
11. Accordingly, all the necessary assets for B&B to generate future mortgage business,
     such as the B&B deposits, the branches, the employees as well as the mortgage
     advisors, will be transferred to Abbey as a result of the transaction. All future
     commercial activity on the market resulting from the former assets of B&B will thus
     be realized by employing the Transferred Assets. Therefore, the Commission takes
     the view that such acquisition constitutes a notifiable transaction under the ECMR,
     since, in accordance with paragraph 24 of the Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice, the
     acquisition of control over such assets has to be considered a concentration within
     the meaning of Article 3 of the Merger Regulation as those assets constitute the
     whole or a part of an undertaking, i.e. a business with a market presence in the
     future.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
12. Although the Transferred Assets do not include the past mortgage business of B&B
     and the turnover linked to this business in the last financial year, in the
     Commission's view, the assets transferred do, however, represent the essential
     productive assets of the savings business of B&B and most or all of the productive
     assets of the mortgage lending business namely, in the latter case, the deposits
     against which loans can be made, the customer relations with savings account
     holders, and the distribution channels.
13. However, regardless of the approach taken to this issue the present transaction has a
     Community dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation, since even
     if, as proposed by the Parties, the Commission were only to consider the interest on
     the deposit amounts transferred to Abbey at the then prevailing base rate of the Bank
     of England (5%), the turnover related to these deposits, which amounts to almost
     […] million pounds sterling, would have been about £[…] million (€[…] million at
     the ECB exchange rate for August 2008), well in excess of the threshold of € 250
     million.
14. As far as Santander is concerned, its worldwide turnover for 2007, including the
     turnover of A&L, was € 73 424 million. The undertakings concerned therefore have
     a combined aggregate worldwide turnover of more than € 5 000 million and
     Community-wide turnover in excess of € 250 million in 2007. Neither of the parties
     achieves more than two thirds of its Community wide turnover in one and the same
     Member State, since Santander achieves only about 35% of its turnover in the UK.
IV. RELEVANT MARKETS
15. The transaction gives rise to horizontal overlaps between Santander and the
     Transferred Assets only in relation to a subset of retail banking products, more
     specifically in the retail savings account and mortgage markets.
                                                  3

16. In respect of banking services for natural persons and microenterprises (retail
    banking), the following segments have been considered in previous Commission
    decisions, whilst leaving open the question of whether such segments constitute
    separate product markets: current accounts, saving accounts, personal loans,
    mortgages and distribution of mutual funds and other investment products. 3 In the
    case of the UK, however, the relevant national competition authorities, namely the
    Office of Fair Trading ("OFT") and the Competition Commission ("CC"), have
    consistently determined that saving accounts and mortgages constitute, for the
    purposes of national law, separate relevant product markets. 4
17. The Commission has, in the past, considered all retail banking markets to be national
    in scope, 5 although it has not specifically investigated the situation in the UK. In the
    UK, the CC has identified a separate market for personal current accounts in
    Northern Ireland as opposed to the remainder of the UK. 6 However, with regard to
    the markets for savings and mortgage products, both OFT and CC have concluded in
    a number of cases that the relevant geographic market is the UK as a whole. 7
18. In the present case, the exact product and geographic market definitions can be left
    open, as serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of the notified transaction
    with the common market, regardless of the market definition considered.
V.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
Retail banking
19. As regards retail banking as a whole, it should be noted that B&B, prior to the
    merger, did not offer a full range of retail banking products but was focused on
    savings and mortgage products, and thus cannot be considered a competitor for the
    primary banking relationship of retail customers. Accordingly, it would be
    inappropriate, in this instance, to analyze the market for retail banking as a whole,
    since, on such a basis, the Parties' activities would not overlap.
3  See e.g. Case No COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO ASSETS, of 3 October 2007
4  Case ME/2660/06 Nationwide Building Society/Portman Building Society of 21 November 2006;
   OFT, Anticipated acquisition by Lloyds TSB plc of HBOS plc, Report to the Secretary of State for
   Business Enterprise and Regulatory Reform, 24 October 2008
5  The segment of banking services for natural persons may also, depending on the specifics of
   commercial practice in the individual markets, include services relating to the business banking needs
   of sole traders, members of the professions and micro-undertakings.
6  CC Report on Personal current account banking services in Northern Ireland; market investigation,
   15 May 2007.
7  See e.g. OFT Case ME/00295 Abbey National plc/Bank of Scotland from 30 January 2001; OFT Case
   ME/1246/01 Halifax Group Plc /Bank of Scotland from 11 July 2001; OFT report in Lloyds/HBOS,
   op.cit.
                                                       4

20. Even if the Commission were to consider the existence of an overall market for retail
    banking affected by the merger, the only reliable indicator readily available to
    determine market share is the number of branches. Post-merger, the merged entity
    would have at most 1155 branches in the UK, i.e. 11.1% of the total 8 (assuming that
    no overlapping branches were closed), representing a limited increment of 1.9% due
    to the Transferred Assets.
21. Therefore the notified transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility
    with the common market on a hypothetical affected market for retail banking in the
    UK.
Savings accounts
22. The proposed transaction does not give rise to an affected market in the UK market
    segment of savings accounts, where the Parties achieve a combined share of [10-
    15]% (based on value of stock at the end of 2007). With regard to new business this
    share was [10-15]%. 9
23. The Commission has also looked at the number of customers for savings accounts,
    which may, however, be a not entirely reliable indicator since many customers
    appear to have accounts at several banks and some of these accounts may be
    dormant or carry only small balances. On this basis, the Parties would achieve a [10-
    15]% market share of savings account customers (increment of [below 5]% due to
    B&B). 10
24. Therefore the notified transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the common market in respect of savings accounts in the UK.
Retail mortgages
25. As set out above, all future commercial activity on the market resulting from the
    former assets of B&B will be realized by employing the Transferred Assets. The
    Transferred Assets contain all the assets necessary in order to carry out a mortgage
    business, in the same volume as carried out by B&B in the past.
26. In taking account of all relevant circumstances at the time of the transaction, the
    impact on competition of the acquisition by Santander of the B&B Transferred
    Assets needs to be considered, at least on a worst case basis, by taking into account
    the market shares generated by B&B in the past. A successful re-establishment of a
    similar business on the basis of the Transferred Assets is by no means excluded a
    priori.
27. Proceeding on this basis, the combined market share in terms of the value of
    outstanding loans at the end of 2007 would be 16.2%, an increment of 3.3% due to
    the Transferred Assets. Even assuming the completion of the proposed
    Lloyds/HBOS merger, the HHI post-merger would be 1306 with a delta of 85, a
8  For the total number of branches, source: British Bankers' Association (2006 figures)
9  Source for both figures: GfK Financial Research.
10 Source: GfK, op. cit.
                                                       5

    value which is well below the threshold for serious doubts established in the
    Horizontal Guidelines. Based on the value of new business, the corresponding values
    for 2007 are 17.3% (including an increment of 3.9% due to the Transferred Assets)
    and HHI of 1298 (delta 104). 11
28. The merged entity will continue to face competition from Lloyds TSB (8.5%),
    HBOS (19.8%, if combined with Lloyds TSB 28.3% 12 ), Nationwide (10%), RBS
    (6.1%) and Barclays (5.9%) as well as the nationalized bank Northern Rock
    (7.6%). 13
29. Therefore, even if the entirety of the mortgage turnover of B&B prior to the
    transaction were considered to correctly reflect the incremental position of Santander
    on the market post-merger, the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as
    to its compatibility with the common market on the UK retail mortgage market.
State Aid aspects
30. On 10 October 2007 the Commission informed Spain of its decision to initiate a
    procedure pursuant to Article 88(2) of the EC Treaty. The procedure in question
    deals with a possible case of state aid due to the possibility under Spanish legislation
    to amortize part of the financial goodwill when Spanish companies acquire
    significant shareholdings in foreign companies, leading to a reduction of the taxes
    paid.
31. The impact on competition in a merger procedure of this possible state aid has been
    considered previously by the Commission on the case of the acquisition by the
    Spanish company Iberdrola of the UK based company Scottish Power in 2007. 14
32. The Commission has already examined the eligibility of Santander to receive this aid
    and its likely level in its decision in case COMP/M.5293, 15 and found this to be
    marginal and without any impact on the competitive position of the Parties. This
    conclusion equally applies in the present case.
33. In its Decision of 1 October 2008, the Commission concluded that Santander did not
    benefit from UK State Aid in the context of its acquisition of the Transferred
11 Source for market size and market shares for both calculations: UK Council of Mortgage Lenders,
   Bank of England
12 The recommendation from the OFT to refer the merger between Lloyds and HBOS to the Competition
   Commission was overruled by the Secretary of State on 31 October 2008, whose decision was upheld
   by the Competition Appeals Tribunal on appeal. As a result, this merger is expected to go ahead. In
   any case, for the purposes of this decision, the competition analysis is unaffected by whether or not
   this merger goes ahead.
13 All values are based on outstanding loans at end 2007.
14 See case COMP/M.4517 – Iberdrola / Scottish Power of 26 March 2007.
15 Case COMP/M.5293 Santander/Alliance & Leicester of 15 September 2008.
                                                       6

     Assets. 16 It moreover concluded that the aid granted by the UK to B&B primarily
     benefitted retail depositors and constituted aid compatible with the common market.
34. It must be recalled that, under Regulation 139/2004, state aid is considered in the
     assessment merely in order to verify that the state measures in question are not such,
     in combination with other elements of the market situation, as to confer on the
     merged entity a market position which would result in a significant impediment to
     effective competition.
35. As the UK State measures mentioned above have been approved by the Commission
     as compatible with the common market and can only be adopted in the framework
     set by the approval decision, it follows that the Commission has concluded that such
     state measures will not lead to any significant distortion of competition.
36. In conclusion, the Commission sees no circumstances specific to the merger
     whereby either the compatible aid granted in the UK, or the Spanish aid scheme still
     under examination, would alter its competition analysis under the ECMR as set out
     above. This decision is entirely without prejudice to the Commission's assessments
     in the State Aid field.
VII.CONCLUSION
37. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
     Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                        For the Commission
                                                        [signed]
                                                        Neelie KROES
                                                        Member of the Commission
16  C (2008)5673 final.
                                                  7
 <<--NEW VERSION-->>                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                           Brussels, 28.09.2008
                                                           C(2008) 5619
   In the published version of this decision, some
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article                PUBLIC VERSION
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information              MERGER PROCEDURE
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a        ARTICLE 7(3) DECISION
   general description.
To the notifying party:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject: Abbey National plc/Bradford & Bingley plc
           Request of derogation pursuant to Article 7 (3) of Council Regulation No.
           139/2004
1.    We refer to your application on Sunday 28 September 2008 for a derogation from
     the suspension obligation provided for in Article 7(1) of Council Regulation (EC)
     No 139/2004 (the "EC Merger Regulation") with regard to the proposed acquisition
     by Abbey National plc of sole control over certain assets of Bradford & Bingley
     ("B&B", UK), submitted pursuant to Article 7(3) of the EC Merger Regulation.
I.    THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
2.    Abbey National ("Abbey") is a wholly owned UK subsidiary of Banco Santander,
     S.A ("Banco Santander", Spain). Banco Santander is an international group of
     banking and financial companies operating in the UK, Spain, and some other
     European countries, as well as Latin America. Banco Santander is also in the process
     of acquiring Alliance & Leicester plc1.
3.    B & B is a UK-based financial services institution providing inter alia specialist
     mortgages and savings products, and retail banking services.
1   See decision of 15 IX 2008, Case M. 5293, Banco Santander/Alliance & Leicester.
                                                       1

4.    The acquisition is to comprise certain assets (hereinafter the Target):
          (a)     the transfer of the entire retail deposits of B & B (the "Deposits") along
                 with a cash amount deposited at the Bank of England;
          (b)    the transfer of the entire issued share capital of Bradford & Bingley
                 International Limited (which operates B & B's Isle of Man deposit
                 business);
          (c)    the transfer of the B & B branches, agencies and employees; and
          (d)    the transfer of B & B's headquarters (including all systems, associated
                 employees and infrastructure) (it is not yet finally determined whether this
                 will be included in the transaction).
5.    Abbey will enter into a transitional services agreement with B & B, in order to
     allow depositors to operate their accounts in the normal course, pending the
     integration of the relevant deposit accounts into Abbey's own operational systems.
     The transfers will be undertaken pursuant to a transfer order made under the Banking
     (Special Provisions) Act 2008.
6.    At this stage of the procedure, as the assets transferred to Abbey together form a
     business with a market presence, and therefore constitute (part of) an undertaking,
     the proposed transaction qualifies as a concentration within the meaning of Article 3
     of the EC Merger Regulation. This is without prejudice to the precise turnover that
     should be attributed to the acquired business.
II.   THE COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.    Santander's s worldwide turnover was €66.4 billion, and its EEA-wide turnover was
     €[…] billion.
8.    As to the Target, Abbey submits that, on the basis of currently available
     information, the turnover that should be attributed to it would amount to £[…]
     million and would thus exceed €250 million. On the basis of the available
     information, the parties do not both achieve more than two thirds of their
     Community-wide turnover in one and the same Member State. Therefore, without
     prejudice to a final assessment of the relevant turnover of the Target, the present
     transaction has a Community dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the Merger
     Regulation.
III. THE APPLICATION FOR DEROGATION
9.    Abbey submits that, as a result of the events in the UK and worldwide financial
     markets, doubts have arisen about the viability of B&B's business, in large part due
     to its significant exposure to UK and worldwide mortgages.
                                                    2

10. Abbey further submits that the Government of the UK has determined that the
    transaction is required in order to protect the deposits and customers of B&B and to
    prevent customers losing confidence in the ability of B&B to safeguard their
    deposits and seeking to withdraw their deposits (a so-called "run on the bank").
    Should such an event occur, the business of B&B would be unsustainable. There is
    the possibility that the assets of B&B would be insufficient to pay out all of the
    deposits of depositors. There may also be associated detriments to UK financial and
    banking markets resulting from a second high profile collapse of a UK retail bank.
11. The overall scheme of the transaction is formed of two parts:
        (a)    the assumption of control of Bradford & Bingley by the UK Government;
        and
        (b)    the transfer of the Target to Abbey.
    The remainder of the Bradford & Bingley business, including in particular its
    mortgage book, will remain under public ownership.
12. According to Abbey, the benefits to UK depositors and to the stability of the UK
    financial markets of the transaction far outweigh any possible competition detriment
    that may be associated with the transaction. Accordingly, even if the Commission
    were to consider that the transaction may give rise to an effect on competition,
    Abbey considers that the interests of consumers and the public interest in the
    stability of the UK financial system would be served by the transaction being
    permitted to be closed prior to clearance being granted.
13. In any event, Abbey considers that the transaction does not give rise to any adverse
    effect on competition. According to Abbey, B&B's share of UK retail deposit
    account balances in 2007 was [0-5]%. This amount has declined in the period June
    2008 to September 2008, as B&B has seen a net outflow of £[…] billion (from a
    base of £[…] billion). Abbey's share of UK retail deposit account balances in 2007
    was [5-10]% (and Alliance & Leicester's [0-5]%). Accordingly, even if both
    transactions are completed, the combined share of the merged entity in retail deposit
    accounts will be [10-20]%. Abbey considers that the merged business will continue
    to face competition from a number of large competitors, including Nationwide ([10-
    20]%), Barclays ([10-20]%), Royal Bank of Scotland ([5-10]%), Lloyds TSB ([5-
    10]% and HBOS – [10-20]%).
IV. THE CONDITIONS FOR DEROGATION PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 7(3) OF
     THE EC MERGER REGULATION
14. Pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Merger Regulation, a concentration falling under that
    Regulation shall not be implemented either before its notification or until it has been
    declared compatible with the common market. Pursuant to Article 7(3) of the Merger
    Regulation, the Commission may, on reasoned request, grant derogation from the
    obligation imposed in Article 7(1). Derogation from the obligation to suspend
    concentrations is granted only exceptionally, normally in circumstances where
    suspension provided for in the EC Merger Regulation would cause serious damage
    to the undertakings concerned by a concentration or to a third party. In deciding on
                                                 3

    the request, the Commission must take into account, inter alia, the effects of the
    suspension on one or more undertakings concerned by the concentration or on a third
    party and the threat to competition posed by the concentration.
A.   THE TRANSACTION FALLS UNDER THE SUSPENSION               OBLIGATION PURSUANT TO
     ARTICLE 7(1) OF THE EC MERGER REGULATION
15. Given that the proposed transaction appears to qualify as a concentration with
    Community dimension within the meaning of the EC Merger Regulation - without
    prejudice to the final determination of the relevant turnover - it falls under the
    suspension obligation laid down in Art. 7(1) of the EC Merger Regulation.
B.   THE EFFECTS OF THE SUSPENSION ON THE UNDERTAKINGS CONCERNED AND THIRD
     PARTIES
16. On the basis of the derogation request and representations made by the UK
    Government which the Commission finds persuasive, the Commission considers that
    the reasons given for a derogation from the suspension obligations are sufficient.
17. B&B is in serious financial distress, and there is a real likelihood that B&B would
    cease to be a viable business.
18. In addition, the consequences of a financial failure of B&B, absent the acquisition
    of the Target by a stable and reputable market player in today’s context, would have
    an impact not only on B&B and the assets being transferred to the Target but also on
    the stability of financial markets and consequently on third parties, including B&B's
    customers. Such a risk would be seriously increased if the acquisition does not take
    place rapidly. The resulting risk for the public would be very significant.
19. The acquisition is also important, as any negative outcome for B&B could also have
    a knock-on effect for other players in financial markets in the UK and beyond. The
    same applies to third parties.
20. Delay in the implementation of the transaction due to the standstill obligation
    imposed by the EC Merger Regulation may cause this disruption to magnify, as
    without the waiver the UK authorities would not be in a position to close the bid
    within the timescale required, which would significantly affect consumer
    confidence.
C.   THE THREAT TO COMPETITION POSED BY THE CONCENTRATION
21. From the information available, it appears that the only affected market would be
    the market for retail deposits in the UK. B&B's share on this market was only [0-5]
    % in 2007 and has declined between June 2008 and September 2008. As a result the
    operation will only result in a minimal overlap. The merged entity will have an
    overall market share of around [5-15]% and will continue to face competition from a
    number of large competitors, including Nationwide, Barclays, Royal Bank of
    Scotland, and Lloyds TSB. Therefore, on the basis of the information provided by
    the parties prima facie the transaction is not likely pose a threat to competition
    within the EEA.
                                                 4

     D. BALANCE OF INTERESTS
22. Based on the above, it appears that the suspension obligation could seriously affect
    the financial interests of the parties and financial stability generally and the benefits
    flowing from the derogation outweigh any potential adverse effects that it may have
    on one or more of the parties or on any third party. Therefore the Commission finds
    that the derogation can be granted in accordance with the application so as to allow
    the acquirer to take all actions that are reasonably necessary to restore the viability
    of the Target and thereby contribute to ensuring financial stability.
VI. CONCLUSION
23. Based on the above considerations and in accordance with Article 7(3) of the
    Merger Regulation, Abbey is granted a derogation from the obligations imposed by
    Article 7(1) of the Merger Regulation until the acquisition has been declared
    compatible with the common market by means of a decision pursuant to Article
    6(1)b or Article 8(1) or Article 8(2) or a presumption pursuant to Article 10(6).
                                                       For the Commission
                                                       (Signed)
                                                       Neelie KROES
                                                       Member of the Commission
                                                 5
