                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 03.12.2008
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2008) D/207642
                                                                 C(2008) 8075
   In the published version of this decision, some                       PUBLIC VERSION
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are                  MERGER PROCEDURE
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information                ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION IN
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                      CONJUNCTION WITH
   general description.
                                                                             ARTICLE 6(2)
                                                                 To the notifying party:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis
                Notification of 29 October 2008 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
                Regulation No 139/2004 1
INTRODUCTION
1. On October 29, 2008, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
      concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the "EC
      Merger Regulation" or "ECMR"), by which BNP Paribas S.A. (“BNP Paribas”, France)
      acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control of
      Fortis Bank S.A./N.V. ("Fortis Bank Belgium"), Fortis Bank Luxembourg S.A. ("Fortis
      Banque Luxembourg") and Fortis Insurance Belgium S.A./N.V. ("Fortis Insurance
      Belgium"), collectively the “Fortis Entities”, by way of exchange and purchase of
      shares.
I.     THE PARTIES
2. BNP Paribas is a banking group listed on Euronext Paris, with international operations
      in a large number of countries across Europe, North and South America, Africa, the
      Middle East, and Asia. BNP Paribas has three core banking businesses: retail banking,
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

     asset management and services (comprising asset management, private banking,
     securities, investments and brokerage online for individuals, insurance, real estate), and
     corporate and investment banking.
3. The Fortis Entities provide banking services to individual, business and institutional
     customers in various countries, mainly in Belgium and Luxembourg. They do not
     operate in the Netherlands. The Fortis Entities' core banking businesses are: retail
     banking, private banking, asset management, and merchant banking. The Fortis Entities
     are also active in the insurance sector in Belgium.
II.   THE OPERATION
4. The notified concentration consists in the acquisition by BNP Paribas of sole control of:
         (i)      Fortis Bank Belgium, by means of the purchase of 74.94% of the issued
                  share capital from the Kingdom of Belgium;
         (ii)     Fortis Banque Luxembourg, through Fortis Bank Belgium which would hold
                  50.1% of the issued share capital prior to closing; in addition, BNP would
                  acquire 16.57% of the issued share capital from the Grand-Duchy of
                  Luxembourg;
         (iii)    Fortis Insurance Belgium, by means of the purchase of 100% of the issued
                  share capital from Fortis Insurance N.V.
III.     CONCENTRATION
5. Following the proposed transaction, BNP Paribas will exercise sole control over the
     Fortis Entities. Therefore, the transaction qualifies as a concentration within the meaning
     of Article 3 (1) b of the EC Merger Regulation.
                                                    2

IV.      COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover2 of more
    than EUR 5 billion (BNP Paribas: € 92,376 million, Fortis Entities: € 100,961.9 million).
    Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (BNP
    Paribas: € […] million, Fortis Entities: […] million), but they do not achieve more than
    two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member
    State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension pursuant to Article 1(2)
    of the ECMR.
V. RELEVANT MARKETS
7. The proposed concentration concerns the provision of banking and insurance services to
    individuals, businesses and institutional customers.
Relevant product markets
8. The Parties' activities overlap in retail and corporate banking, payment card issuing,
    consumer credit, asset management, financial leasing, financial market services,
    investment banking and insurance services.
Retail banking
9. Retail banking generally comprises all banking services to private individuals and very
    small enterprises. In previous decisions relating to the retail banking sector 3 , the
    Commission has left open whether individual retail banking products represent separate
    relevant product markets or whether several retail banking products may form part of a
    single relevant product market. The competitive assessment in these decisions was,
    accordingly, carried out based on indicators relevant to retail banking as a whole (more
    specifically current account relationships and branches) and also on the basis of the
    following possible relevant product markets considered separately: personal current
    accounts, savings accounts, consumer loans, mortgages and distribution of mutual funds.
10. The notified concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
    common market on an overall retail banking market or on any of these segments.
    Therefore, the precise market definitions can be left open for the purpose of this
    Decision.
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Notice
    on the calculation of turnover (OJ C66, 2.3.1998, p25). The turnover of the Fortis Entities does not take
    into account the 2007 turnover achieved by the asset management operations of ABN AMRO, which are,
    however, included in the scope of the transaction.
3   COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets
                                                         3

Corporate banking
11. Corporate banking generally comprises banking services to large corporate customers
    ("LCC") and smaller commercial clients such as small and medium-sized enterprises
    ("SMEs"). In previous Commission decisions 4 , distinct product markets for large
    corporate customers on the one hand and SMEs on the other hand have been found,
    although the Commission has observed that there is no obvious single parameter by
    which companies can be designated as SMEs or LCCs and which would be applicable to
    all market players.
12. The Commission has also pointed out that there are several indications that, within
    corporate banking, distinct relevant product markets for (i) domestic payment services,
    (ii) foreign payment services, (iii) cash management services, (iv) loans and (v) savings
    could be identified 5 .
13. The notified concentration only results in a limited overlap in corporate banking to
    SMEs in France, which does not give rise to an affected market in the sense of the
    Implementing Regulation 6 . Therefore it is not necessary, for the purposes of the present
    Decision, to conclude on the precise market definition since serious doubts do not arise
    as to the compatibility of the transaction with the common market on any alternative
    market definition.
Payment cards
14. The Commission has, in the past, distinguished two main payment card-related activities
    apart from card processing: first, the issuing of cards to individuals and companies, and
    secondly the “acquiring” of merchants (including hotels, airlines and other businesses
    accepting cards) for card payment acceptance 7.
15. In the present case, the Parties only overlap in the relevant geographic markets, namely
    Belgium and Luxembourg, in the area of card issuing. The remainder of the analysis is
    therefore limited to the issuing markets.
16. Within the activity of payment card issuing, the Commission has, in previous decisions 8
    discussed the possibility of distinguishing between different types of cards, in particular
    between personal and corporate cards; between international and national cards;
    between debit and credit/charge cards 9 ; and between selective and general cards. It has
4   COMP/M.3894, Unicredito/HVB; COMP/M.2567, Nordbanken/Postgirot; COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN
    AMRO Assets
5   COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets, recital 26.
6   Commission Regulation (EC) Nº 802/2004 of 7 April 2004 implementing Council Regulation (EC) Nº
    139/2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings, Annex I, Form CO, Section 6, III (OJ
    L133, 30.4.2004, p.1).
7   COMP/M.5241,American Express/Fortis/Alpha Card
8   COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB; No COMP/M. 2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot; COMP/M. 3740 Barclays
    Bank/Föreningssparbanken/JV; COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets; COMP/M.5241,American
    Express/Fortis/Alpha Card
                                                       4

    also looked at payment cards on a card brand basis. However, it has left the exact market
    definition open 10 .
17. In the present case, the market investigation has determined that there is a need to
    distinguish at least between debit and credit/charge cards and between selective and
    general cards. In this case no particular issues arise on a brand basis and so this can be
    left open. It can also be left open whether personal and corporate cards belong to the
    same or to separate relevant markets. Finally, the distinction between international and
    national cards is not relevant in this case because of the context of migration of Belgian
    and Luxembourg payment systems to a common standard, as a result of which almost all
    general-purpose cards now carry the Maestro logo and functionality, allowing their
    international use.
18. A payment card is an instrument which forms part of a payment scheme and is issued to
    a natural or legal person allowing for the completion of payment transactions in
    establishments affiliated to the payment scheme in question, without the use of cash,
    both at the point of sale – using an enabled terminal – and remotely via telephone, mail
    or internet. Payment cards may on occasion bundle the payment facility with additional
    services to the benefit of the end user, corporate subscriber, or the counterparty to the
    payment transaction.
19. The services offered by payment cards to final users and which are therefore relevant to
    the definition of the relevant issuing market(s) are of the following kinds 11 :
    a)      Debit cards are linked to a customer's bank account. Payments made with debit
            cards are immediately, or with a short delay of at most a few days, debited on a
            gross basis from the customer's account. In the event that such debits result in an
            overdrawn account, the conditions for overdrafts on current accounts apply.
    b)      Charge cards, also known as "deferred debit cards", are required to be settled on
            a net basis in full at the statement due date and do not offer credit. Statements are
            issued periodically, typically on a monthly basis.
    c)      Credit cards in the strict sense 12 , also referred to as "revolving credit cards",
            require the customer only to settle a fraction of the outstanding balance figuring
9   Previous merger decisions have generally referred simply to "credit cards" without explicitly
    distinguishing between true credit cards and charge cards (see definitions below). In the present Decision,
    we use the term "credit/charge cards" to avoid ambiguity, except where referring separately to one or other
    category.
10  In its antitrust decision of 17 October 2007 in the case COMP/38606 Groupement des Cartes Bancaires,
    the Commission similarly left open whether the market at stake in that case was limited to CB cards, or
    should be extended to include American Express and Diner's Club, or indeed to private label cards, since
    the concerns in that case arose regardless of the exact market definition.
11  This description excludes electronic wallet services, such as the Belgian Proton and Luxembourg
    Minicash services, which are carried on debit cards. Compare also the glossary incorporated into the
    Commission's Decision of 19 December 2007 in Cases COMP/34.579 MasterCard, COMP/36.518
    EuroCommerce and COMP/38.580 Commercial Cards.
12  Colloquially, both charge and credit cards are referred to in Belgium as "credit cards", as they share
    similar properties on the retailer side and offer payment facilities on the same international payment
    networks such as Visa, Mastercard, American Express and Diner's Club.
                                                            5

            on periodic statements of account. The remaining part of the outstanding balance
            may be carried over to the next statement period, in which case interest charges
            become due 13 . The customer disposes of a credit facility up to a prearranged
            ceiling which is replenished as repayments are made on the outstanding amount.
    d)      Hybrid store cards offer particular conditions or services when used in the
            sponsoring store or collection of stores, and carry a proprietary logo, but can still
            be used in other establishments, whether nationally or internationally, for which
            purpose they are cobranded with national or international payment scheme
            logos 14 . In the present case, all cards in this category are understood to be
            revolving credit cards 15 .
    e)      "Selective" or (pure) store cards are accepted for payment in all commercial
            outlets of a given brand or selection of brands, within a geographic scope which is
            typically national but may in certain cases be broader. Outside of this proprietary
            context, such cards are not accepted. In the present case, the market investigation
            has shown that most such cards carry a revolving credit facility, but certain store
            cards are deferred debit cards.
20. All of these cards except pure store cards may also allow the withdrawal of cash at an
    ATM facility which, in addition to being treated for credit purposes as any other point of
    sale transaction, may also give rise to additional charges.
21. Corporate cards are issued to the employees of companies for use on company
    business, whereas personal cards are issued to private individuals for their personal
    use. Hybrid store cards and revolving credit cards are rarely issued to corporate
    customers, on the one hand by virtue of their nature and, on the other, by virtue of the
    fact that the credit terms available on such cards are typically, with, in this case, limited
    exceptions, unattractive to corporate customers.
22. Credit and charge cards can also be broken down between "universal" cards and "special
    purpose cards", where the latter category consists of pure store cards only, whereas the
    "universal" category consists of both hybrid store cards and cards which do not have any
    association with particular store brands. Universal cards are characterized by much
    wider acceptance for payments at a range of commercial outlets. Such cards carry the
    brands of payment networks such as Visa, Mastercard, American Express and Diner's
    Club which ensure their wide acceptance across a range of outlets.
13  For certain cards, interest is due from the transaction date itself.
14  For the purposes of this Decision, the term "store cards" is used for convenience. However, it should be
    understood that such cards relate to a number of types of business and not only to retail stores.
15  Certain Belgian cards make use of the Maestro network which is typically used for debit purposes, but are
    linked to a revolving credit facility. These cards are considered revolving credit cards for the purposes of
    this decision.
                                                             6

Exclusion of debit cards from the relevant market
23. The Parties do not overlap in the issuing of debit cards, but do overlap in the issuing of
    credit/charge cards (i.e. deferred debit cards and revolving credit cards). The market
    investigation has shown that debit cards do not form part of the relevant market in this
    case, for the following reasons.
24. Whilst both debit cards and credit/charge cards offer payment facilities to businesses
    and end consumers, the market investigation has shown that these two categories of
    cards are clearly distinct from each other and that the debit card segment, at least for the
    countries affected by the proposed transaction, does not form part of any market affected
    by the transaction. This is also due inter alia to the following properties of debit cards:
    •   Debit cards are linked to a bank account, whereas for credit/charge cards this is not
        necessarily (and frequently is not) the case.
    •   Debit cards are in general still only used nationally, even if in Belgium and
        Luxembourg they already carry international functionality under the Maestro
        scheme, and their use abroad is expected to become broader within the eurozone in
        the future 16 .
    •   Because they are significantly cheaper for retailers, debit cards are much more
        widely accepted than credit/charge cards. As a result, payment by credit/charge card
        is an alternative only in a subset of outlets. Moreover, many of the outlets which do
        accept credit/charge cards do not accept debit cards. This is typically the case, for
        instance, for many restaurants and hotels. It follows that the pattern of acceptance of
        debit and credit/charge cards at point of sale is, in many instances, complementary.
    •   In most instances, debit cards cannot be used for so-called "card not present"
        transactions (for example purchases by telephone, mail order or internet)
    •   Debit cards are usable only if the user has funds on his/her current account (or an
        overdraft arrangement)
    •   The value of individual payment transactions which can be made by debit cards is
        normally significantly lower than that which can be made by credit/charge cards.
    •   Debit cards can be used for cash withdrawals, normally without a fee, at least at
        terminals belonging to the issuing bank and frequently on a market-wide basis
        (which is the case in Belgium). There is also no fee payable for many withdrawals in
        euro at ATMs throughout the eurozone. Where a fee is payable, it is usually much
        lower than the corresponding fee for withdrawals using credit/charge cards,
        including for operations in non-euro currencies.
    •   Operations with debit cards are accounted for in the customer's overall current
        account statement, whereas credit/charge cards offer specific statements per card, a
        facility which is relevant for corporate users wishing to track expenses on a given
        account.
16  The Commission has not excluded, however, that debit cards issued to Luxembourg residents may be
    more frequently used abroad than is the case for Belgium.
                                                          7

    •    In Belgium and Luxembourg, debit cards also carry a pre-paid electronic wallet
         function called Proton/Minicash respectively, which is used for micropayments,
         typically in commercial outlets which do not accept the debit card functionality (or
         credit cards) for payment, as well as in automated point of sale payments such as
         parking meters and vending machines.
    •    From the standpoint of banks, debit cards have much more limited fraud risks
         associated with them and do not involve the extension of credit, which makes them
         cheaper to offer and accessible to a wider range of cardholders 17 .
25. In view of these properties of debit cards, they are not substitutable for credit/charge
    cards for most consumers in most instances and can be excluded from the relevant
    market(s) pertaining to credit/charge cards.
26. For the purposes of the present Decision it is not necessary to decide whether debit cards
    constitute a relevant market by themselves or are part of a wider retail banking market
    given their close relationship to current accounts, since, as already indicated, the Parties
    do not overlap in this area.
Distinction between universal and special purpose cards
27. The market investigation has also confirmed that a distinction has to be made within the
    area of credit/charge cards, as regards the payment function of these cards 18 , between
    universal cards, on the one hand, and special purpose cards, on the other.
28. There is, certainly, a degree of substitutability between the two types of cards at the
    outlets served by the special purpose cards, since universal cards can often be used to
    pay at the same outlets. However, special purpose cards often have specific advantages
    which do not apply to universal cards, for example in terms of discounts or loyalty
    programs. It is, indeed, these very advantages which represent the interest for a customer
    to hold a special purpose card in the first place. A customer who holds such a card is
    therefore likely a priori to use it in preference to universal cards at the outlets which the
    card serves, at least if the circumstances which motivated holding it in the first place
    have not changed. In any case, such cards cannot be used outside the individual outlets
    concerned.
29. The Parties do not overlap in the area of special purpose cards, since all of the cards
    issued by BNP Paribas in Belgium in cooperation with stores are cobranded with
    Mastercard and therefore enter into the hybrid store card category set out above, which
    is a subcategory of universal cards.
30. Although both pure store cards and hybrid store cards are generally obtained by the
    holder from the store or other business concerned, the market investigation has clearly
    shown that it would be incorrect to view at least revolving credit store cards – whether
    universal or special-purpose – primarily as a service provided by the stores themselves
    to their customers. In any case, the store itself cannot distribute such cards directly, since
    a specific credit license is required (in addition to many other specialized assets).
17  Even charge cards also involve the provision of credit in an accounting sense for the period until the
    statement due date.
18  For the credit function, which needs to be considered separately, see below.
                                                          8

31. Rather, stores enter into agreements with credit providers, such as the Parties, to
    distribute cards and are remunerated by receiving a share of the profits made on the
    credit sold through the card. In the case of hybrid store cards, it also may be the case that
    a part of the interchange fee payable by the acquirer to the issuer is rebated to the
    store 19 . Such cards are therefore a revenue center, not a cost center, for stores as well as
    for the credit provider.
32. In certain cases, the credit provider does provide additional services to the commercial
    partner, such as participating in promotional activities, which may then be billed
    separately or considered part of the overall package. It appears, however, that the value
    of such services is low compared to the purely financial part of the relationship and that,
    moreover, these services are not necessarily unique and therefore may be substitutable
    with promotions offered in other ways. The Commission has therefore concluded that, in
    the circumstances of the present case, such services are neither germane to the relevant
    market definition nor require consideration as a market by themselves.
33. It follows that hybrid store cards, being universal credit/charge cards, participate fully in
    the market for universal credit/charge cards and should only be considered distinct as
    regards their distribution channel, namely stores. The customization of the product
    appears merely to be a commercial arrangement with the distributing store 20 .
34. As regards the distinction within universal credit/charge cards between deferred debit
    and revolving credit cards, this appears not to be relevant as regards the payment
    function of the card, since both types of card offer similar payment services. The
    difference arises only in respect of the credit function, and, as such, revolving credit
    cards may be additionally viewed as giving rise to an "installed base" for the sale of
    consumer credit, a market considered further below.
35. Many universal revolving credit cards, i.e. cards which offer the possibility to draw
    credit on the card, are, in fact, used by consumers who do not make use of the credit
    function at all, or who do so only rarely. Consumers may wish to hold such a card
    because the cardholder fee is lower than that for a deferred debit card, or waived
    entirely. Some such cards offer cashback for transactions. Hybrid store cards may also
    offer other advantages linked to the commercial partner in question.
36. As such, an analysis of the revolving credit segment as distinct from deferred debit
    cards appears not to be justified as regards the payment function of the card.
37. It follows that overlaps arise between the Parties in respect of card payment-related
    services in this case only on the market for universal credit/charge cards.
Personal versus corporate cards
38. As regards a possible split within this market between personal cards and corporate
    cards, it is readily apparent that these two types of card serve distinct segments of
    demand, carry different commercial conditions and that corporate cards also offer
    certain additional services to the corporate customer as a whole. As a result, they are not
    substitutable from the demand side. It has not, however, in the framework of the present
19  This issue does not arise for pure store cards because the issuer and acquirer for such cards is either the
    same or, in any case, not subject to the need for multilateral clearing arrangements.
20  […]
                                                            9

    procedure, been possible to establish whether these two segments form a single market
    by virtue of supply-side substitutability.
39. In any case, for the purposes of the present decision it is unnecessary to decide on
    whether this market should be further subdivided between personal cards and corporate
    cards, since the transaction, as modified by the commitments entered into by the
    Notifying Parties, will not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
    market regardless of whether or not these segments are considered to be distinct relevant
    markets.
Conclusion
40. It may therefore be concluded that the relevant market in this case is the market for
    universal credit/charge cards (considering both deferred debit and revolving credit cards
    together).
Card-based consumer credit
41. From the standpoint of the credit provider, the revenues from the business of issuing
    revolving credit cards are principally derived from interest payable on amounts
    borrowed using the card. Secondarily, universal revolving credit cards, as any
    credit/charge card, generate revenue for the issuer via the interchange fee arrangements
    with the acquirer applicable under the scheme in question, although, in the case of
    hybrid store cards, this interchange fee may be partly rebated to the store itself.
42. Issued revolving credit cards therefore constitute an "installed base", allowing the issuer
    to sell credit to the holder via the card. As the credit line has already been authorized
    and credit checks performed, credit obtained in this way requires no further paperwork
    and thus is very easy for the customer to access.
43. In the notification, the Notifying Party argued that card-based consumer credit was part
    of a broader market including personal loans, which include both loans sold directly via
    banks and finance at the point of sale. However, this view has not been supported by the
    market investigation. Personal loans are priced differently and contracted in relation to
    substantial individual purchases. In the case of loans afforded at the point of sale, they
    are often cofinanced by the retailer so that their apparent cost is lower still, and not
    infrequently may even be interest-free. The repayments associated with such loans are
    regular and occur over a period which is agreed in advance. By contrast, revolving
    credit, notwithstanding interest rates which are nominally significantly higher, is
    attractive to consumers because of its flexibility: borrowing requires no paperwork once
    the card is obtained, and repayments are possible on a fully flexible basis.
44. Revolving credit thus serves a distinct purpose in allowing customers to borrow in order
    to finance short-term gaps in cash flow 21 , regardless of the purchasing need or
21  In the event that such gaps persist for a longer period, the customer may be able to refinance the
    borrowing at a lower rate via a personal loan allowing him or her to repay the credit card debt
    immediately.
                                                      10

    opportunity 22 . As such, it has all the characteristics of a distinct market from the demand
    side.
45. As regards the supply side, the provision of card-based finance clearly requires many
    assets which are specific to that business, in addition to some assets, such as credit
    scoring, which may be common to other types of consumer finance. There is therefore
    no prospect that, in the short term, substitution would effectively occur from one market
    to the other.
46. Having established that revolving credit is distinct from personal lending, it is necessary
    further to consider whether overdraft facilities on a current account, which also
    constitute a form of revolving credit, might be substitutable with card-based credit.
47. The market investigation has shown that market participants consider these forms of
    credit as substitutable only to a limited extent and conceive of the two segments as
    different markets.
48. The most obvious difference between card-based finance and facilities on personal
    accounts is related to the need for the customer to have a current account relationship
    with a bank in order to obtain an overdraft facility. In addition to this, the regulatory
    framework applicable to overdrafts is quite different from that applying to card-based
    credit 23 , although it varies by Member State.
49. As the Parties' activities overlap to the greatest extent in Belgium, it is necessary to
    analyze more specifically the situation on this market.
50. Article 3 of the Belgian Law of 12 June 1991 pertaining to consumer credit foresees that
    credit agreements under which the consumer is obliged to repay the credit within no
    more than three months and which do not constitute the opening of a credit line or which
    are for an amount less than 1250 euros are excluded from the scope of the law. These
    definitions figure in the statistics maintained by the National Bank of Belgium on
    consumer credit, which, as a result, similarly exclude any such facility.
51. As a result, banks in Belgium typically offer two types of overdraft facility linked to a
    current account: so-called facilités de caisse which are for less than 1250 euros and must
    be repaid within three months (i.e. the current account may not remain overdrawn for
    three months in a row) and formal openings of credit lines for higher amounts and
    without this restriction.
52. Under the same Belgian Law, ceilings are imposed on the interest rate which can be
    charged on a credit opening. These ceilings are 2-3% higher for credit cards than for
    credit openings linked to a current account, in function of the amount of the credit line.
    Moreover, the cost of financing a facility linked to a current account is also reduced by
    virtue of the fact that all credits made by third parties to the account result in a decrease
    in the amount outstanding, without any intervention being necessary on the part of the
    borrower. By way of contrast, the amount outstanding on card accounts is only reduced
    when the borrower explicitly makes a repayment.
22  Even if revolving credit is more expensive than a personal loan, it may allow a customer to take advantage
    of a promotional opportunity or a specific purchase opportunity, the value of which to that customer more
    than offsets the costs of the financing.
23  Cf. Directive 2008/48/EC of 23 April 2008 on credit agreements for consumers
                                                          11

53. To the extent, therefore, that a given consumer is in a position to use a debit card to
    make a purchase which then results on a negative balance on his or her personal
    account, regardless of whether this is connected to a facilité de caisse or a formal credit
    opening, and to the extent that the rates practised on both types of borrowing are situated
    in fact at or close to the ceilings established by law, which, at least for general purpose
    cards, is empirically observed 24 , it is reasonable to assume that this consumer will have
    a rational preference for the use of the facility connected to the current account.
54. It should also be recalled, as already outlined, that the use of a credit/charge card as a
    means of payment, including the use of store-related cards, has a number of
    characteristics which distinguish it from a debit card and may result in a consumer
    favouring such a card for particular types of transaction. Its use in a context giving rise
    to a credit situation would then result in a credit linked to the card.
55. It follows that the demand for the use of credit linked to a revolving credit card must be
    seen as distinct from the demand for other types of revolving credit, at least in Belgium
    and under the current market and regulatory conditions, for at least three reasons: the
    cost of the credit, its availability at the moment of the purchase decision, and
    considerations relating to the payment itself. For the purposes of the present decision,
    and given the complexities that a more detailed assessment of substitutability would
    entail, it is therefore necessary to adopt a pro forma approach to the market definition
    and assume that the choice of a given type of credit is largely a function of the purchase
    situation and other exogenous explanatory variables, and that therefore these two types
    of credit belong to separate relevant markets.
56. Lastly, as regards this market, the market investigation has not allowed the Commission
    to determine whether or not it would be appropriate to distinguish between credit offered
    on universal cards and credits offered on private label store cards. However, this
    question can be left open for the purposes of the present Decision, since, on either
    alternative, serious doubts arise as to the compatibility of the notified transaction with
    the common market in Belgium.
57. Accordingly, the relevant market in this case is the market for card-based consumer
    credit. As will be argued further below, this market has a national dimension.
Asset management
58. Asset management concerns the provision of investment advice and often also the
    implementation of this advice with delegated powers from the client. Asset
    management services include the creation, establishment and marketing of retail pooled
    funds (mutual funds, unit trusts, investment trusts and open-ended investment
    companies) and the provision of portfolio management services to pension funds,
    institutions, international organisations and private investors.
59. In previous decisions, the Commission has left open the question whether these
    individual products constitute separate product markets, but pointed out that asset
24  At the date of the decision, the ceiling for card-based credit for an amount between 1250 and 5000€ was
    17% (AEIR). Cetelem Mastercard, Citibank and KBC Pinto were all priced at or very close to this ceiling.
                                                          12

    management excluded the provision of portfolio management services to individuals
    (so-called private banking) 25 .
60. The Commission has further considered the market for custody services within the asset
    management segment and has left open the question of whether custody services could
    be further subdivided into (i) global custody services to investment institutions and (ii)
    domestic custody services, and within this segment (a) institutional custody services and
    (b) retail custody services 26 . In spite of limited overlaps among the Parties' activities in
    asset management, the notified concentration does not result in affected markets in any
    of the alternative possible market definitions considered, therefore, precise market
    definitions can be left open in this case.
Leasing
61. Leasing comprises the leasing of a wide range of assets such as industrial and
    agricultural machines, computers, real estate and transportation vehicles.
62. The Commission considered in one previous decision whether 27 car fleet leasing should
    be distinguished from other types of leasing but finally left this open. It also considered
    that car fleet and management services on the one hand and car finance leasing products
    on the other hand could constitute two separate markets 28 . BNP Paribas is active in the
    field of contract car hire. The Notifying Party submits that contract car hire and car
    finance leasing are two distinct businesses and that should a distinct market for car
    finance leasing be identified, contract car hire solutions should not be considered as part
    of this market. The market investigation, however, tended to suggest that BNP was
    considered as a competitor of companies active in car leasing as such and hence that this
    distinction may not be competitively relevant. The question can, in any case, be left
    open since the concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
    common market on any of the alternative possible market definitions considered.
63. The Parties' activities also overlap in small ticket vendor leasing. According to the
    Notifying Party, “small ticket" refers to office equipment, in particular items such as
    computers, printers, copiers and telecommunications material. "Small ticket vendor
    leasing", as opposed to direct leasing, refers to the refinancing of office equipment
    leasing providers (typically the original equipment manufacturer or its authorized
    distributor) through the transfer of their leasing contracts to banks or other leasing
    providers.
64. The Notifying Party considers that the small ticket vendor leasing business does not
    constitute a relevant product segment, since, from the demand-side, a leasing provider
    can equally refinance its activity through (i) credit lines offered by banks; or (ii)
    transfers of leasing contracts to banks or other providers equally active in direct leasing,
    such as De Lage Landen or ING Lease. For the case at hand this question can be left
25 COMP M. 4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets; COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB; COMP/M. 1453
    AXA/GRE
26 COMP/M.1979, CDC/Banco Urquijo/JV; COMP M.4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets.
27 COMP M. 4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets
28  COMP M.4199 De Lage Landen/Athlon; COMP M. 3029 Société Générale/AIHL Europe; COMP M.
    3090 Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/Lease Plan/JV.
                                                     13

    open, as the notified transaction would not lead to serious doubts as to its compatibility
    with the common market, even if a relevant segment for small ticket vendor leasing was
    identified.
65. The Commission has considered in past decisions 29 another possible distinction between
    operational leases and financial leases. Under operational leases, the risks of ownership
    are retained by the lessor and the duration does not cover the major part of the asset's
    economic life (ownership is not automatically transferred to the lessee at the end of the
    lease term), whereas financial leasing is generally for a longer period and fully repays
    the asset cost resulting in the transfer of ownership of the product to the lessee at the end
    of the lease. Whether operational and financial leasing constitute separate relevant
    product markets can be left open for the purpose of the current transaction, since the
    concentration does not raise serious doubts on any of the alternative market definitions
    considered.
Financial market services
66. Financial market services comprise services such as trading (on an agent or riskless
    principal basis) in securities, bonds and derivatives as well as foreign exchange trading,
    money market operations (i.e. trading in treasury bills and commercial paper from banks
    and companies) and other asset classes.
67. In previous cases, the Commission has left open the question whether each of these
    services might constitute a separate product market 30 . This question may remain open in
    this case as the notified concentration does not result in affected markets in this area,
    regardless of the alternative market definition considered.
Investment banking
68. Investment banking includes services such as advice on the financial aspects of mergers
    and acquisitions, initial public offerings and arranging new issues of stocks and bonds,
    excluding the underwriting of such operations. The Commission has analyzed in
    previous decisions the market for investment banking as a whole, while identifying the
    following possible market segments: (i) M&A advice, (ii) IPO advice, and (iii) services
    related to arranging new issues of stocks and bonds 31 . In the present case, the market
    definition can again be left open, since the notified concentration does not lead to
    serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market, regardless of the
    alternative market definitions considered.
Insurance
69. In its previous decisions, the Commission has distinguished between three broad
    categories of insurance, namely life insurance, non-life insurance and reinsurance 32 . It
    has been further noted that, from the demand side, life and non-life insurance can be
    divided into as many individual product markets as there are different kinds of risks
29 COMP M. 4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets
30 COMP M. 3894, Unicredito/HVB
31 COMP/M. 3894, Unicredito/HVB
32 COMP/M.4284, AXA/Winterthur
                                                   14

    covered, given that their characteristics, premiums and purposes are distinct and that
    there is typically no substitutability from the consumers’ perspective between different
    risks insured. However, supply side considerations may lead to broader product markets
    in respect of certain kinds of risk.
70. With respect to life insurance, the only activity resulting in affected markets in this case,
    the Commission has traditionally distinguished between group life insurance products
    and individual life insurance, as well as between predominantly risk-based products, on
    the one hand, and products oriented towards savings and pension provision, on the other.
    It has also looked at the relevance of distribution channels, in particular of the banking
    channel 33 . In the present case, however, the precise market definition can be left open
    since the overlap among the Parties' activities is marginal on all segments considered.
Relevant geographic markets
Retail banking
71. In its previous decisions, the Commission has considered that, with regard to retail
    banking services, the relevant geographic market is national in scope due to the different
    competitive conditions within individual Member States and the importance of a
    network of branches 34 . This approach may also be followed in the present case.
Corporate banking
72. With regard to corporate banking, the Commission has, in the past, always considered
    that the relevant geographic market for services to SMEs is national in scope 35.
    Although the Commission has recognized that corporate banking products offered to
    large corporate clients (LCCs) have a tendency to have a more international dimension,
    the Commission has ultimately left open whether the market for corporate banking to
    LCCs is national or wider in scope 36. This approach may also be followed in the present
    case.
Payment cards
73. In previous decisions, the Commission indicated that the market for payment cards
    issuing is still national in scope even though it admitted that there may be scope for the
    widening of the market in the future 37 . The market investigation in the present case has
    confirmed that the markets in which the Parties' activities overlap are all national in
    scope.
33 COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/Erste Bank Versicherungssparte
34 COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets; COMP/M.2578, Banco Santander Central Hispano/AKB.
35 COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets; COMP/M.3894, Unicredito/HVB; COMP/M.2578, Banco
    Santander Central Hispano/AKB
36 COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets
37 COMP/M.3740, Barclays Bank/Föreningssparbanken/JV and COMP/M.2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot
                                                  15

Card-based consumer credit
74. This market is linked to the installed base of cards and therefore is national in scope.
    The national scope of the market also follows from the effect of national regulation on
    the provision of credit to private individuals and households and the national scope of
    credit registers.
Asset management
75. Asset management has previously been looked at on the basis of either a national or
    international/EEA scope 38. The market investigation in recent cases 39 has provided
    some support for the view of the notifying Parties that the market is wider than national,
    but the Commission did not deem it necessary to conclude on the exact scope of the
    geographic market as no competition concerns arose under any possible market
    definition. This question may also be left open in the present case, since on a national
    scope of the relevant market the overlaps in the Parties' activities are minimal, whereas
    on a wider scope their combined market share remains below 15%.
Leasing
76. According to the Commission's previous practice, the markets for leasing services are at
    least national in scope 40 . In recent cases, the exact geographic market definition was left
    open, since on any possible geographic market definition the concentration did not raise
    competition concerns 41 . In the present case, the market has been considered on a
    national basis, but this can ultimately be left open as the transaction does not lead to
    serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market, regardless of the
    geographic market considered.
Financial market services
77. As regards financial market services, the Commission has considered that most of the
    market segments are international in scope but some of them have been analyzed from a
    national perspective 42 . This question may also be left open in the present case
Investment banking
78. As regards investment banking, the Commission has considered that most of the market
    segments are international in scope 43 , but some of them have been analyzed from a
    national perspective 44. This question may, once again, also be left open in the present
    case.
38 COMP/M. 3894, Unicredito/HVB; COMP/M.1453, AXA/GRE; IV/M.1043, BAT/Zurich.
37 COMP/ M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets
40 COMP/M.4199, De Lage Landen / Athlon
41 COMP/ M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Asset
42 COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets
43 COMP/M.2225, Fortis/ASR; COMP/M.1172, Fortis AG/Generale Bank.
44 COMP/M.4155, BNP Paribas/BNL
                                                     16

Life insurance
79. The Commission in its previous decisions has defined the markets for life insurance as
    being national in scope as a result of national distribution channels, the established
    market structures, fiscal constraints and differing regulatory systems 45 . The market
    investigation in the present case has not suggested that any other view would be
    appropriate in this instance.
VI. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
Horizontal effects
80. BNP Paribas mainly operates in France and Italy while Fortis Entities mainly operate in
    Belgium and Luxembourg. The Parties' activities do, however, result in overlaps in a
    number of markets.
81. Of these overlaps, the following do not give rise to affected markets given that the
    Parties' combined market shares do not exceed 15% 46 : personal current accounts and
    saving accounts in France; personal loans in Belgium, Germany and Poland (except for
    card-based credit in Belgium); mortgages in France and Germany; private banking in
    Belgium, Italy, France Luxembourg, Spain and the United Kingdom; payment card
    issuing in France; corporate banking to SMEs in France; corporate banking to large
    corporate customers in the EEA; asset management in France, Italy, Luxembourg and
    Spain, or an EU/EEA-wide market; financial market services; investment banking; and
    leasing in Germany, Hungary, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom.
82. The overlaps that result in affected markets are the following: leasing in France; leasing
    in Belgium; retail banking and, more specifically, mortgages in Belgium; life insurance
    in Belgium; universal credit/charge card issuing in Belgium; and card-based consumer
    credit in Belgium.
French leasing market
83. In the overall French leasing market the Parties' will have a combined market share of
    20% (BNP Paribas [10-20]% and Fortis Entities, [0-5]%). In France, the Fortis Entities
    are not active in car related activities (car fleet, car finance lease, contract car hire) or in
    operational leasing. The Parties' activities only overlap in financial leasing 47 where
45 COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/Erste Bank Versicherungssparte; COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN
    AMRO Assets; COMP/M.4284, AXA/Winterthur
46 Market shares quoted in this decision are based on the parties' estimates unless stated otherwise.
47 In this decision "financial leasing", when used in connection to the French market, has the meaning of
    "crédit-bail" that extensively corresponds to the concept of financial leasing used in the decision in case
    M. COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets. The crédit bailleur or lessor puts an asset at the disposal
    of the crédit preneur or lessee in consideration for a (rent) payment over a defined period of time. The
    duration covers the major part of the asset’s economic life. At the end of the lease term, the lessee may
    call the option initially agreed upon to purchase the asset at the said residual value (less than the market
    value). In such situations, the leased equipment is considered as an asset in the lessee’s balance sheet and
    the lessee writes off the cost of the equipment. The lessor holds a claim on the lessee.
                                                           17

    their combined market share in 2007 based on new commitments was [10-20]% (BNP
    Paribas [10-20]% and Fortis Entities [5-10]%). The increment in the new entity's market
    share is [5-10]% and it will remain in competition with Société Général ([10-20]%),
    Crédit Agricole ([10-20]%), Crédit Mutuel-CIC ([10-20]%), Natixis ([10-20]%) and
    others (28%). The resulting entity will therefore face competition from significant
                                                                          48
    competitors and it will hold market shares below 25% . These are all indications that
    the notified concentration is unlikely to lead to competition concerns.
84. It may therefore be concluded that serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of
    the notified transaction with the common market in respect of the French leasing market.
Belgian leasing market
85. In the overall Belgian leasing market, the Fortis Entities' market share in 2007 based on
    new commitments, was [20-30]%, whilst the market share of BNP Paribas on the same
    basis was [0-5]%. ING, KBC and Dexia are the main competitors of the Parties in this
    market with [20-30]%, [10-20]% and [10-20]% market shares respectively. There are
    also a number of smaller players accounting for the remaining 23% of the market.
86. ING, KBC and Dexia all have large retail banking networks, which according to the
    Notifying Party is the main channel for the provision of leasing solutions, along with
    brokers and direct sales by suppliers of leasable assets. According to the Notifying Party
    there is no brand loyalty in this market. The market investigation has confirmed that all
    of the general leasing companies are considered as similar competitors by leasing
    customers although they may have individual strengths in different areas.
87. BNP Paribas only provides contract car hire solutions through its subsidiary Arval that
    in 2006 accounted for around [5-10]% of the total number of cars under contract car hire
    in Belgium. As stated above, in the view of the Notifying Party, contract car hire is a
    separate market from car leasing since car lease and contract car hire correspond to
    financing and long term renting solutions respectively.
88. If contract car hire was considered as a separate market, there would be no overlap in
    this segment. However, even if contract car hire and financial car leasing solutions were
    part of the same market, Forties Entities' market share (in terms of new commitments) in
    this hypothetical market would be around [5-10]% and BNP Paribas' around [5-10]%.
    Therefore the concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
    common market on any of the alternative market configurations that could be
    considered.
89. The activities of the Fortis Entities and BNP Paribas overlap in financial leasing 49 . In
    terms of new commitments, Fortis Entities' market share in 2007 was [20-30]% and
48 ECMR, recital 32; Horizontal Guidelines, p. 18.
49  In this decision, statistics relating to "financial leasing", when used in connection to the Belgian market,
    refer to "leasing on balance", which corresponds in all essentials to the concept of financial leasing used in
    the decision in case M. COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets. Leasing on balance means that the
    residual value at which the lessee may buy the asset at the end of the lease term is less than 15% of the
    initial value of the asset. In such situations, the leased equipment is considered as an asset in the lessee’s
    balance sheet and the lessee writes off the cost of the equipment. The lessor holds a claim on the lessee.
                                                              18

    BNP Paribas' [5-10]%. The new entity will therefore have a market share of [20-30]%
    and will face strong competition from ING ([10-20]%), KBC ([10-20]%) Dexia ([10-
    20]%) and other (23%). In operational leasing, the overlap between the Parties' activities
    is of marginal importance ([0-5]%) and leads to combined market shares of less than
    25%.
90. It also came to light during the market investigation that BNP is a strong player in the
    field of small ticket vendor leasing. However, according to the Parties' estimations, BNP
    Paribas market share in this segment in 2007 would be between [10-20]% and [20-30]%
    and Fortis Entities' between [0-5]% and [5-10]%. Therefore the new entity's market
    share would remain below the 25% threshold that acts as an indication that a
    concentration is not liable to seriously impede effective competition 50 .
91. It may therefore be concluded that serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of
    the notified transaction with the common market in respect of the Belgian leasing
    market or any segments of it.
Belgian retail banking and mortgages
92. In Belgian retail banking, the transaction has a limited impact. Fortis Entities retail
    network in Belgium comprises 1,064 branches offering a full range of financial services
    from current/savings accounts to consumer/mortgage loans to individuals, professionals
    and small business, and, as such, Fortis is the largest Belgian retail bank. BNP Paribas,
    however, does not have a branch network in Belgium and only operates in specific
    segments, of which consumer lending and mortgages are the most relevant in the context
    of the current transaction. Therefore the assessment of this transaction need only be
    considered in relation to these two segments.
93. As regards the segment of consumer loans, this, if it were considered a relevant product
    market, would not give rise to an affected market since, according to the Parties'
    estimates, in 2007 Fortis Entities' market share for consumer loans in terms of loans
    outstanding was [10-20]% and BNP Paribas' market share was only [0-5]%. ING is the
    market leader in this segment with a market share of [20-30]%, with Dexia and KBC
    having [10-20]% and [5-10]%, respectively and with a number of other smaller
    competitors accounting for the remaining 42.6% of the market. All of the Parties' main
    competitors equally have developed branch networks. Moreover, the figures given by
    the Notifying Party included revolving credit, and would be lower if this were excluded,
    as the market investigation has shown should be the case. Therefore, the transaction
    does not lead to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market on the
    segment of consumer lending.
94. In the field of mortgages, which is the only affected segment (i.e. with a combined
    market share above 15%), the Forties Entities distribute mortgage products through
    Fortis' retail banking network and third-party distributors, while BNP Paribas operates
    only through brokers. According to the Notifying Party, the Fortis Entities’ market share
    in 2007 in outstanding loans was of [20-30]%. BNP Paribas’ market share was only [0-
    5]%. As a result, the combined market share of the Parties will be still below 25% and
    the increment in the new entity’s market share is marginal. The new entity will remain
    in competition with KBC, ING and Dexia, each having a market share of 10 to 15%, as
    well as with a number of smaller competitors accounting for as much as 35.3% of the
50 ECMR, recital 32; Horizontal Guidelines, p. 18.
                                                   19

    market. Therefore, the concentration does not lead to serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the common market on the Belgian mortgage market.
Belgian life insurance market
95. On the overall Belgian market for life insurance, the new entity’s market share (in
    market premiums, excluding 1st pillar insurance) will increase marginally from [20-
    30]% to [20-30]% and the new entity will remain in competition with five significant
    operators: AXA ([10-20]%), Ethias ([10-20]%), Dexia ([10-20]%), KBC ([5-10]%),
    ING ([5-10]%). In the group life insurance segment of this market Fortis Entities’
    market share in 2007 was [20-30]% and the transaction will result in a market share
    increment of [0-5]%. The resulting entity will compete with AXA, which is a large
    player with a market share of [10-20]%, and with up to 4 companies (PV KBC, Dexia
    and Allianz) with market shares between 5% and 10%.
96. In the segment of individual insurance in Belgium, the combined market share of the
    Parties reaches [30-40]%, however, the market share increment resulting from the
    transaction is marginal ([0-5]%). In addition, the resulting entity will compete with
    AXA, KBC, Dexia (each with a market share of approximately [10-20]%), Ethias ([10-
    20]%) and ING ([5-10]%). Therefore, the combined market shares of the Parties remain
    limited in all cases, the increment in the new entity's market share is marginal (less than
    0.5% in all the possible market configurations) and it will be confronted in all segments
    with strong competitors.
97. Therefore, the concentration does not lead to serious doubts as to its compatibility with
    the common market on the Belgian life insurance market.
Issuing of universal credit/charge cards
Belgium
98. The Parties are present in the Belgian market for universal credit/charge cards both
    directly and through a number of joint ventures.
99. Forties Entities are present directly; via Alpha Credit, a 100% owned subsidiary of
    Fortis Belgium; via Alpha Card, a full-function joint venture with American Express 51 ;
    and via Finalia, a joint venture between Alpha Credit and Finaref, which is a subsidiary
    of the French bank Crédit Agricole.
100. BNP Paribas is present through its subsidiary BNP Paribas Personal Finance
    Belgium (PFB), formerly known as Cetelem Belgium, which issues cards under the
    Mastercard label and Aurora brand, and distributes such cards to consumers both
    directly and in cooperation with a number of commercial partners. It is also present
    through Fimaser, a Belgian joint venture with the retail chain Carrefour; Fidexis, a 100%
    owned subsidiary of PFB; and, by virtue of its stake in and the processing arrangements
    for, KBC Pinto Systems, a joint venture with the Belgian bank KBC.
101. All of the activities in which BNP Paribas has a stake rely on Cetelem Services
    EEIG ("EEIG") for certain support needs, whereas other support is provided directly by
    BNP Paribas through subsidiaries unrelated to PFB. EEIG is a European Economic
51  See case No COMP/M.5241 American Express/Fortis/Alpha Card
                                                   20

   Interest Grouping in which PFB itself, Fimaser, KBC Pinto Systems, and UCB
   Hypotheken n.v. (also a subsidiary of BNP Paribas) are members.
102. Notwithstanding that BNP Paribas holds a 40% minority stake in Fimaser and KBC
   Pinto Systems, examination of the arrangements in question shows that it very likely
   exercises de facto control over these undertakings, not only by virtue of significant
   shareholdings and veto rights, but also based on operational considerations. As regards
   Fortis, joint control over its Alpha Card subsidiary has already been established in the
   Commission's earlier decision approving this venture, whereas joint control over Finalia
   can be presumed. The Commission has concluded, therefore, that the links between BNP
   Paribas and all of these ventures, as well as between Fortis all of the ventures in which it
   has a stake, are such that, absent modifications to the transaction, it was likely that all of
   these entities would act on the market with a high degree of commercial coordination.
103. The analysis of market shares therefore needs to be based on the shares of all of
   these entities on the relevant market. In what follows, the share of all of the entities in
   which BNP has a stake are attributed to it, and of all the entities in which Fortis has a
   stake are similarly attributed to it.
104. Based on the definition of the relevant market given earlier, the share of the Parties
   by number of cards post-merger would be [40-50]% (Fortis: [20-30]%; BNP: [10-20]%).
   The share would be somewhat higher, around [40-50]%, if the consumer segment of the
   market were considered alone. This market is, moreover, a concentrated one, dominated
   by the four large Belgian banks: in addition to Fortis, which has [1.0-1.5] million cards,
   KBC and Dexia have around [350-650] thousand cards, and ING has [300-500]
   thousand, whilst Citibank, which is active in direct marketing, has [200-400] thousand 52 .
   BNP Paribas has [500 thousand-1 million] before the transaction, and is therefore easily
   the number two player. The combined total of [1.5-2.5] million represents the clear
   market leader and around four times its nearest competitor.
105. In addition to this significant addition of market shares, as a result of which the
   combined entity would already be easily the largest on the market by number of cards
   post-merger, it is also necessary to consider the distribution structure of the market and
   the specific position of Fortis as the largest retail as well as corporate bank in Belgium.
   Both of these factors are likely to lead to a further growth in market share as a result of
   the merger which, while difficult to quantify ex-ante, is likely to be material.
106. In terms of distribution, Fortis is focused on its retail client base but, through Alpha
   Credit, Alpha Card and Finalia, also has a significant interest in the store distribution
   channel 53 . BNP Paribas does the vast majority of its business through distribution and
   promotion arrangements with stores, and represents, on the Notifying Party's figures,
   significantly over half of all such distribution in Belgium.
52 Source: RBR report cited, plus Parties' figures. Comfort card, issued by Santander Personal Finance, is a
   private label card and therefore not considered here.
53 Finalia is active only in pure store cards, but as it is only responsible for 1% of Fortis cards in any case, its
   influence on the analysis is not material. Alpha Credit distributes both store cards and revolving credit
   cards for Fortis (the latter cards use the Maestro functionality). Note that we use the term "store" here in a
   broad sense to indicate all consumer-oriented businesses, as indicated above, regardless of their
   possession or otherwise of an established retail outlet structure and regardless of whether the cards are
   distributed directly through that structure.
                                                             21

107. It can therefore be reasonably concluded, as suggested by certain respondents in the
   market investigation, that the transaction as originally proposed would be likely to allow
   BNP Paribas to further strengthen its already considerable position on the store
   distribution channel by means of leveraging the commercial arrangements which Fortis
   already has by virtue of its strong position on the Belgian corporate banking market.
   Competition on this channel would be further reduced by the assimilation of Alpha
   Credit and the other Fortis affiliates.
108. As a result, the only competitors which would remain on this channel post-merger
   with an offer of universal cobranded cards would be Citibank and International Card
   Services n.v. The latter is a subsidiary of Fortis Bank Nederland which has now been
   acquired by the Dutch State but which retains significant operational links to Fortis
   Belgium, as a result of which its fully independent behaviour in the short term cannot be
   concluded with certainty. Two further competitors, Santander Personal Finance and
   Cofidis do not presently offer universal credit/charge cards cobranded with stores, but
   only private label cards (pure store cards as defined above).
109. The market investigation has established that BNP Paribas and Fortis have to be
   considered close competitors, and probably each other's closest competitor, on the store
   distribution channel.
110. There is therefore a significant risk not only that the overall market share would
   further grow post-merger, but also that the store distribution channel for universal cards
   would be substantially foreclosed to competition.
111. Since there is almost no cross-selling by banks of cards issued by other banks 54 , the
   bank channel is largely captive to own current account customers and therefore
   inaccessible to new entrants. Given the infrequent nature of decisions by private
   individuals to switch banking provider and the tendency for several retail banking
   services, including payment cards, to be marketed by banks, or at least perceived by
   consumers, as a bundle, commercial conditions in this captive part of the market are
   likely anyway to be less constrained by the presence of other banking providers than
   commercial conditions afforded by independent channels.
112. It follows that competition for the contested part of the market primarily takes the
   form either of promotion through the store channel or of direct promotion to consumers
   in isolation from current accounts, of which the only significant example of the latter in
   Belgium at the current time appears to be Citibank. The store channel must, therefore, be
   viewed as having a particular significance in the overall market and, especially, for new
   business.
113. As a result, it can be concluded that the transaction leads to serious doubts as to its
   compatibility with the common market on the Belgian market for universal credit/charge
   cards owing to the high combined market share, the fact that this share is much higher
   than the closest competitors, and that the Parties are each other's closest competitor on
   the store channel.
54 With the exception of certain arrangements of marginal importance to the overall market, such as […].
                                                       22

Luxembourg
114. In Luxembourg, BNP Paribas has a significant business in revolving credit cards,
   representing around [60-70]% of the segment, which is a purely consumer segment.
   However, Fortis Banque Luxembourg is not active on this segment, or, if active, then
   only to a very limited extent which is statistically negligible. In addition, a very small
   number of cards issued by Alpha Credit are issued to Luxembourg residents, but these
   cards represent well below 1% of the segment.
115. Fortis cards in Luxembourg are exclusively (or almost exclusively) deferred debit
   cards, and represent, on the Parties' figures, [20-30]% of both the consumer and
   corporate segments 55 . BNP Paribas has a minor presence on the deferred debit segment.
116. The combined market share of the Parties on the market for universal credit/charge
   cards therefore represents [30-40]% on the consumer segment (Fortis: [20-30]%; BNP:
   [10-20]%) and around [30-40]% on the total market, given that BNP is not active in the
   corporate segment.
117. It can also be observed that the Parties' activities on the card market are essentially
   complementary in Luxembourg, with Fortis active in the deferred debit segment and
   BNP Paribas in the revolving credit segment.
118. As in the case of Belgium, although to a somewhat lesser extent 56 , the transaction
   would give rise to a certain ability for BNP to cross-sell its revolving credit products
   through relevant Fortis commercial clients. This is likely to lead to a certain growth in
   the market and in the combined share of the Parties in the future, although this cannot be
   estimated with any precision.
119. It follows that serious doubts as to the compatibility of the notified transaction with
   the common market on the market for issuing universal credit/charge cards in
   Luxembourg cannot be excluded.
Card-based consumer credit
120. The Parties' activities in this market overlap only in Belgium, since, according to the
   Notifying Party, Fortis is not active, and, if present at all, then only to a very limited
   extent, in the corresponding market in Luxembourg. The remainder of this section
   therefore only discusses Belgium.
121. Reliable data on the number of revolving credit cards in circulation were not
   available to the Commission and could only be estimated by the Parties. Although such
   data (as for the cards market as a whole) is contained in the report Payment Cards
   Western Europe 2008 by Retail Banking Research Ltd., which has been useful to the
   Commission in its assessment, the Notifying Party presented convincing evidence,
   partly also confirmed by the market investigation, that these figures contained certain
   inaccuracies.
55 Excluding, as for Belgium, fuel cards.
56 The Commission has not been able to establish the exact position of Fortis on the retail and corporate
   banking markets in Luxembourg but using the number of differed debit cards, none of which are store
   cards, as a very rough proxy, it would represent around [20-30]% of the market. BNP Paribas has no
   significant presence in Luxembourg on these segments.
                                                      23

122. The Notifying Party estimated the combined market share post-merger by number of
   revolving credit cards to be around [40-50]% (BNP: [30-40]%; Fortis: [10-20]%). The
   Commission considers that this estimate is likely, if anything, to understate the Parties'
   position, since even plugging the figures provided by the Notifying Party for its own and
   Fortis' business into the RBR analysis, and adjusting the market size accordingly, gives
   a combined share of [60-70]% (BNP: [40-50]%; Fortis: [10-20]%).
123. More significantly, it is very likely that the Parties' share by number of cards – or at
   least the part due to BNP which represents the main element of it – understates the share
   as a function of cards which are actually used by holders to draw credit. This is because
   revolving credit cards may be attractive to consumers for other reasons such as lower
   cardholder fees and promotions such as cashback, and such consumers may never, or
   only rarely, make use of the credit facility. Cards offered through stores, however, are
   often offered in connection with a specific credit transaction, in which the credit
   motivation is present from the outset. Moreover, as previously argued, although such
   credit is relatively expensive, it cannot be assumed that other benefits to the cardholder –
   such as the opportunity to make a purchase at favourable terms which he or she would
   not otherwise be able to make – do not outweigh this cost.
124. The Notifying Party has also argued that this market should not be measured in
   terms of the number of cards in circulation, since many cards may be infrequently used,
   but rather in terms of the value of credit drawn on the card, which represents the sales of
   credit made. In principle, the Commission accepts that this might be a more appropriate
   indicator. However, a reliable assessment on this basis has proven to be difficult to
   make. This is principally because the available statistics do not make a distinction
   between credit lines opened in connection with a credit card, and lines opened in
   connection with a current account.
125. The Notifying Party has estimated that the Parties' combined share in the value of
   outstanding loans on credit cards at the end of 2007 would have been of the order of [20-
   30]% (Fortis: [10-20]%; BNP: [10-20]%), based on an outstanding amount of [500-750]
   million euros. However, this estimate appears to the Commission to be subject to
   considerable uncertainty due to the pro-forma nature of the method used to estimate the
   outstanding amounts on card-based credit for competitors, and hence the total market
   size. The Commission has therefore concluded that this figure is unlikely to be more
   reliable than a figure based on number of cards.
126. In any case, even if the Commission were to accept a rough estimate of this order of
   magnitude, in order to determine competitive interaction it is also required to consider,
   in this regard, the particular nature of the Parties' business model and of the contracting
   of credit in relation to store cards and hybrid store cards, which is (i) linked to purchases
   at the sponsoring stores and the distribution of the cards themselves through the
   corresponding commercial relationship which the store has with its customer whilst (ii)
   also offers the convenience of a universal card which offers credit to cover purchases, as
   well as the pure payment functionality, in a much wider range of outlets. In this respect,
   it is clear that the Parties represent close competitors to each other, and probably are
   each other's closest competitor in what is, as already noted, a highly concentrated market
   segment and, absent any remedy, could become even more concentrated in the future.
127. Finally, it also needs to be borne in mind that the number of cards issued constitutes
   an installed base, and that this number could, through the notified transaction, increase
   further. The combination of the client relationships of Fortis and BNP and of the
   installed base of cards therefore gives rise to opportunities to sell credit which may in
                                                  24

   this case be better measured by the number of cards in circulation than alternative
   measures.
128. It should be noted that the figures above relate to the market for card-based credit as
   a whole, including both universal and store cards, as these were the only figures
   available to the Commission. However, if the market were defined as credit on universal
   cards, it is very likely that the market share of the Parties would be even higher, since
   this category represents all of BNP Paribas business and around two-thirds of the
   business of the Fortis entities by number of cards, whilst in the private label category
   Santander's Comfort Card has a significant installed base of [200-400] thousand cards 57 ,
   equivalent to that of Fortis overall.
129. It follows from the above that the transaction also leads to serious doubts as to its
   compatibility with the common market on the Belgian market for card-based consumer
   credit.
Vertical and conglomerate effects
130. No vertical effects have been identified. As for conglomerate effects, it should be
   noted that BNP Paribas and Fortis Entities’ combined product offer will not be
   significantly different from BNP Paribas’ current portfolio or from the portfolio of any
   other large European bank. The proposed concentration essentially consists in
   broadening the geographic scope of the Parties' existing product portfolios.
131. AXA’s independence as a competitor to the resulting entity was questioned by one
   respondent during the market investigation in view of the existence of certain structural
   links between AXA and the merging Parties: cross-shareholdings between BNP Paribas
   and AXA 58 , agreements […], common participation in joint ventures59 and certain,
   albeit limited, cooperation arrangements […].
132. Taking into account the limited nature of the links identified and the existence of a
   significant number of market players in the markets affected by the notified
   concentration, which makes it unlikely that the Parties face a bilateral incentive to
   coordinate their behaviour, these links appear not to be of such a nature as to reduce the
   level of competition in the market.
57 Source: RBR report already cited.
58 BNP Paribas has a 6,1% stake in AXA and AXA holds 5,9% of the shares of BNP Paribas.
59 BNP Paribas and AXA jointly control Natio Assurance (home and motor products), an undertaking only
   active in France where it achieves a market share of only [0-5]% of the market. BNP Paribas and AXA
   hold respectively 33,5% and 11,7% in Services Epargne Entreprise (back office services for the
   management of employees savings in France) that has a turnover of 60 million Euro. AXA and Forties
   Entities hold a minority stake in Fortima (secured infrastructure services to brokers) along with other
   insurance companies. Fortima's turnover is of marginal importance.
                                                       25

State Aid issues
133. In the context of the proposed merger, a number of State measures that might benefit
    the Parties to the transaction have been adopted. In keeping with the case-law of the
    Court, the Commission has to consider the impact of these measures on the financial
    strength and future market position of the Parties to the notified concentration and their
    consequences for the maintenance of effective competition in the Common market post-
    transaction 60 .
134. On 29 September 2008, Fortis Bank Belgium received a capital injection by the
    Belgian State of € 4.7 billion in exchange for 49.9% of its shares. An Emergency
    Liquidity Assistance ("ELA") was also put in place by the Belgian Central Bank in
    favour of Fortis Bank Belgium on the same date. On 5 October, Belgium purchased
    almost all of the remaining 50.1% stake in Fortis Bank Belgium from Fortis SA at a
    price of a further € 4.7 billion and accepted to take a 24% stake in a special vehicle
    created to harbour distressed assets of Fortis Bank Belgium.
135. On 29 September 2008, Luxembourg injected € 2.5 billion into Fortis Bank
    Luxembourg in exchange for 49.9% of the shares.
136. On 21 October 2008, BNP Paribas announced the intention of the French
    government to inject € 2.55 billion in the framework of a recapitalisation scheme put in
    place by France in the context of the financial crisis. This transaction should not take
    place until the Commission takes a final position on the compatibility of this scheme.
137. In the context of the current transaction, Belgium intends to sell 74.94% of the
    issued share capital of Fortis Bank Belgium to BNP Paribas for a consideration of the
    equivalent of € 8.25 billion in new shares of BNP Paribas, which represents pro rata a
    premium of 17% over the price paid in September. Luxembourg will sell a stake of 16%
    in Fortis Bank Luxembourg to BNP Paribas for a consideration of the equivalent of
    around € 800 million also paid in new shares of BNP Paribas.
138. As any credit institution active in France, BNP Paribas is eligible for refinancing
    scheme put in place by France that was approved by the Commission on 30 October
    2008 by decision in state aid case N 548/2008. Under this scheme, BNP Paribas has
    access to a liquidity facility guaranteed against collaterals within certain limits and
    subject to conditions.
139. By decision of 20 November 2008 in state aid case N 574/2008 (not yet published),
    the Commission authorised state guarantees in favour of Fortis Bank Belgium subject to
    conditions. In addition, all of the state measures implemented between 29 September
    and 5 October have now been authorized by the Commission.
140. It must in any case be recalled that under Regulation 139/2004, state aid is
    considered in the assessment merely in order to verify that the state measures in question
    are not such, in combination with other elements of the market situation, as to confer on
    the merged entity a market position which would result in a significant impediment to
    effective competition.
60  Judgement of the CFI of 31 January 2001, RJB Mining/Commission, T-156/98, ECR p. II-337, points 114
    -125.
                                                      26

141. As the State measures which might benefit the resulting entities post-transaction as
   mentioned above have been approved by the Commission in the meantime as
   compatible with the common market and can only be adopted in the framework set by
   the approval decision, it follows that the Commission has concluded that such state
   measures will not lead to any significant distortion of competition.
142. In the context of the merger assessment, the market investigation has confirmed that
   market participants do not, in general, believe that the merged entity will be in a
   privileged position to compete in the market as a result of state assistance. The
   Commission also sees no circumstances specific to the merger whereby such compatible
   aid would alter its competition analysis under the ECMR as set out above. This Decision
   is entirely without prejudice to the Commission's assessments in the State aid field.
Conclusions
143. It follows from the above that the transaction leads to serious doubts as to its
   compatibility with the common market on the Belgian markets for universal
   credit/charge cards and card-based consumer credit. It cannot be excluded that it would
   also lead to serious doubts on the Luxembourg market for universal credit/charge cards.
VII. COMMITMENTS
A. Description of the proposed commitments
144. On 26 November 2008, BNP Paribas submitted an initial proposal which included
   […]the divestiture of 100% of the shares of BNP Personal Finance Belgium S.A./N.V.
   (hereinafter, the "PFB Divestiture Commitment"). […]
145.   […]
146. […] The Commission has therefore concluded that only the PFB Divestiture
   Commitment would be appropriate to eliminate competition concerns in line with the
   Commission's remedy policy 61 .
147. The PFB Divestiture Commitment submitted on 26 November 2006 included the
   following:
   - 100% of the shares of BNP Paribas Personal Finance Belgium s.a/n.v.: a company
   geographically spanning Belgium and Luxembourg that reflects the merger of Cetelem
   Belgium, Fidexis and UCB Belgium and that reached an outstanding of […] million
   euros in 2007. It markets, inter alia, consumer personal credits, international revolving
   credit cards and store/hybrid store cards and credit management services to the
   commercial partners with whom they cooperate for revolving credit cards
   - 100% of Fidexis: a 100% subsidiary of PFB active in the field of personal loans and
   linked credits at the point of sale, revolving credit cars for consumers and small
   companies and credit card management services to the commercial partners with whom
61 Commission Notice on remedies acceptable under the Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 and under
   Commission Regulation (EC) No 802/2004, Official Journal C 267, 22.10.2008, p. 1-27
                                                    27

    they cooperate for revolving credit cards. Fidexis' reached an outstanding of € […]
    million in 2007
    - PFB's goodwill and the registered trademarks One and Isis Finance
    - The regulator's authorisation to act as credit provider in Belgium and Luxembourg and
    the MasterCard license
    - All contracts entered into by PFB with its suppliers and customers […]
    - all customers, credit and other records of PFB and Fidexis
    - PFB's dedicated employees […]
    - PFB key personnel
    - the maintenance of all existing arrangements with respect to the IT support functions
    supplied by BNPP to PFB for a transitional period [...].
2. Improvements to the proposed commitment retained
148. Following the market test, the commitments proposal was improved on 28 November,
    inter alia by incorporating the following provisions:
    - the explicit inclusion in the list of PFB's intangible assets of its stake in Cetelem
    Services EEIG ("EEIG") and its equity interest of 40% in KBC Pinto Systems
      - the right of the Purchaser to use the Aurora trademark for a transition period.
      - the possibility for the Purchaser to extend […] upon request the above mentioned
      arrangements with respect to the IT support functions supplied by BNPP to PFB and
      EEIG and the guarantee that any such support functions will be provided on terms
      comparable to those granted to other subsidiaries of BNP Paribas Personal Finance
      (France).
      - the provision of the necessary funding by BNP Paribas to PFB during the whole
      divestment period plus at least […] at the option of the purchaser on comparable
      conditions to those granted to other subsidiaries of BNP Paribas Personal Finance
      (France) on the drawing date, provided the total amount does not exceed the level of
      funding induced by the outstanding on the Closing date and the Purchaser presents a
      risk compatible with market standards in these types of operations.
      - BNP Paribas' commitment not to enter, for a period of […] after Closing, into any
      new agreement with the stores or car dealers that are currently PFB's clients which
      would be similar or equivalent to such existing agreements.
      - […].
                                                  28

B. Assessment of the proposed commitments
1. Suitability for removing the serious competition concerns
149. As all the activity carried out in Belgium and Luxembourg by BNP Paribas in
    universal credit/charge cards, with the exception of the cards issued in cooperation with
    Carrefour, was channelled through PFB and its subsidiaries, the PFB Divestiture
    Commitment substantially reduces the addition of market shares, from a combined share
    of [40-50]% down to a share of [30-40]% in Belgium. Most notably, it would result in a
    new important player on the market, particularly in the store channel, alongside the
    continued ability of BNP Paribas to compete in this channel. It would have a
    concomitant effect in Luxembourg and on the market for card-based consumer credit.
    As a result it fully addresses the competition concerns identified.
150. Whilst the Commission was unable to conclude definitively on the existence of
    serious doubts in the market for universal credit/charge cards in Luxembourg, since the
    entire activity of BNP Paribas on this market is managed by BNP Paribas Personal
    Finance Belgium, and, in line with the serious doubts evidenced on the Belgian market,
    the Notifying Party has proposed to divest this entity, thereby in any case eliminating
    entirely the overlap also on the Luxembourg market.
151. In this regard it must also be noted that PFB is run as an integrated entity covering
    Belgium and Luxembourg, and that a carve-out of the Luxembourg operations would
    threaten the viability of the remedy. The Notifying Party has, furthermore, not expressed
    any wish to carve out what would then be a small fraction (less than 10%) of the
    operations of that entity.
2. Viability
152. According to the Notifying Party, PFB is currently a viable and competitive business
    with all the assets and personnel which contribute to its current operation and which are
    necessary to ensure its viability and competitiveness. From an operational perspective, it
    is managed and operated separately from other BNP Paribas entities, while only partially
    sharing some common IT support functions, which will be provided to it for a
    transitional period.
153. The results of the market test confirm this appraisal, as all of the competitors consulted
    considered PFB to be a viable business subject to assurances regarding the dependence of
    PFB on the provision by BNP Paribas of IT support functions and the funding required by
    the Purchaser in order to finance PFB's existing credit portfolio and to develop its
    activity. Both concerns have been addressed by means of the above improvements to the
    proposed commitments.
154. There is a relatively high number of potential purchasers, such as existing
    competitors in the market or potential new entrants into the Belgian consumer finance
    market, which include some banks established in Belgium which may be interested to
    expand into this sector. Therefore, there is a sufficient degree of certainty that the
    transfer of the divestment business to the purchaser will be implemented within a short
    time period.
                                                  29

3. Conclusion on the commitments
155. As indicated, BNP Paribas has committed to divest 100% of the shares of PFB,
    including 100% of PFB's subsidiary Fidexis, its stake in GEIE Cetelem services and its
    equity interest of 40% in KBC Pinto Systems.
156. According to the information provided by BNP Paribas, confirmed by the market test,
    PFB operates as a stand-alone entity, with own resources and management in order to
    provide consumer personal credits, international revolving credit cards and store/hybrid
    store cards and credit management services to the commercial partners with whom they
    cooperate for revolving credit cards.
157. In light of the foregoing, the Commission considers that the PFB Divestment
    Commitment is suitable for remedying the serious doubts on the compatibility of the
    concentration with the Common Market and the EEA which have been established in the
    previous sections of this Decision.
C. Conditions and obligations
158. Under the first sentence of the second subparagraph of Article 6(2) of the Merger
    Regulation, the Commission may attach to its decision conditions and obligations
    intended to ensure that the undertakings concerned comply with the commitments they
    have entered into vis-à-vis the Commission with a view to rendering the concentration
    compatible with the common market.
159. The fulfilment of the measure that gives rise to the structural change of the market is a
    condition, whereas the implementing steps which are necessary to achieve this result are
    generally obligations on the parties. Where a condition is not fulfilled, the
    Commission’s decision declaring the concentration compatible with the common market
    no longer stands. Where the undertakings concerned commit a breach of an obligation,
    the Commission may revoke the clearance decision in accordance with Article 6(3) of
    the Merger Regulation. The undertakings concerned may also be subject to fines and
    periodic penalty payments under Articles 14(2) and 15(1) of the Merger Regulation.
160. In accordance with the basic distinction described above, the decision in this case is
    conditioned on the full compliance with the conditions set out in paragraphs 1 – 3 of the
    Commitments submitted by the Notifying Party on 28 November 2008 and with the
    obligations set out in the other Sections of the Commitments.
                                                   30

VIII.     CONCLUSION
161. The Commission has concluded that the remedies submitted by the Notifying Party are
   sufficient to remove the serious doubts raised by the concentration. Accordingly, subject
   to the full compliance with the conditions set out in paragraphs 1 – 3 of the
   Commitments submitted by the Notifying Party on 28 November 2008 and with the
   obligations set out in the other Sections of the Commitments, the Commission has
   decided not to oppose the notified operation and to declare it compatible with the
   common market and with the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application
   of Article 6(1)(b) and Article 6(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
162. The detailed text of the commitments is annexed to this decision. The full text of the
   annexed commitments forms an integral part to this decision.
                                                     For the Commission
                                                     [signed]
                                                     Neelie KROES
                                                     Member of the Commission
                                                31

By hand and by fax: 00 32 2 296 43 01
European Commission – Merger Task Force
DG Competition
Rue Joseph II 70
B-1000 Brussels
                          Case M. 5384 – BNP Paribas/Fortis
          COMMITMENTS TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION
        Pursuant to Article 6(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 139/2004 (the “Merger
Regulation”), BNPP hereby provides the following Commitments (the “Commitments”) in
order to enable the European Commission (the “Commission”) to declare the acquisition of
certain Fortis entities (“Fortis”) by BNP Paribas compatible with the common market and
the EEA Agreement by its decision pursuant to Article 8(2) of the Merger Regulation (the
“Decision”).
        The Commitments shall take effect upon the date of adoption of the Decision.
        This text shall be interpreted in the light of the Decision to the extent that the
Commitments are attached as conditions and obligations, in the general framework of
Community law, in particular in the light of the Merger Regulation, and by reference to the
Commission Notice on remedies acceptable under Council Regulation (EEC) No 139/2004
and under Commission Regulation (EC) No 802/2004.
A.      DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of the Commitments, the following terms shall have the following meaning:
Affiliated Undertakings: undertakings controlled by BNP Paribas S.A., and/or by the
ultimate parents of BNP Paribas S.A., whereby the notion of control shall be interpreted
pursuant to Article 3 Merger Regulation and in the light of the Commission Notice on the
concept of concentration under Council Regulation (EEC) No 139/2004;
BNPP: BNP Paribas S.A., incorporated under the laws of France, with its registered office
at 16, boulevard des Italiens, 75009 Paris, France, and registered with the
Commercial/Company Registry (Registre du Commerce et des Sociétés) at Paris under
number 662 042 449; or any company duly registered and directly or indirectly controlled
by BNP Paribas S.A.;
Closing: the transfer of the legal title of the Divestment Business to the Purchaser;
Divestment Business: the businesses, as defined in Section B and the Schedule, that BNPP
commits to divest;
                                                    32

Divestiture Trustee: one or more natural or legal person(s), independent from the Parties,
who is approved by the Commission and appointed by BNPP and who has received from
BNPP the exclusive Trustee Mandate to sell the Divestment Business to a Purchaser […].
Effective Date: the date of adoption of the Decision;
First Divestiture Period: the period of […] from the Effective Date;
Hold Separate Manager: the person appointed by BNPP for the Divestment Business to
manage the day-to-day business under the supervision of the Monitoring Trustee;
Key Personnel: all personnel necessary to maintain the viability and competitiveness of the
Divestment Business, as listed in the Schedule;
Monitoring Trustee: one or more natural or legal person(s), independent from the Parties,
who is approved by the Commission and appointed by BNPP, and who has the duty to
monitor BNPP’s compliance with the conditions and obligations attached to the Decision;
Parties: BNPP and Fortis;
Personnel: all personnel currently employed by the Divestment Business, including Key
Personnel, staff seconded to the Divestment Business, shared personnel and the additional
personnel listed in the Schedule;
Purchaser: the entity approved by the Commission as acquirer of the Divestment Business
in accordance with the criteria set out in Section D;
Trustee(s): the Monitoring Trustee and the Divestiture Trustee;
Trustee Divestiture Period: the period of […] from the end of the First Divestiture Period.
B.     THE DIVESTMENT BUSINESS
       Commitment to divest
1.1    In order to restore effective competition, BNPP commits to divest, or procure the
       divestiture of the Divestment Business by the end of the Trustee Divestiture Period
       as a going concern to a Purchaser and on terms of sale approved by the Commission
       in accordance with the procedure described in paragraph 15.
1.2    To carry out the divestiture, BNPP commits to find a Purchaser and to enter into a
       final binding sale and purchase agreement for the sale of the Divestment Business
       within the First Divestiture Period.
1.3    If BNPP has not entered into such an agreement at the end of the First Divestiture
       Period, BNPP shall grant the Divestiture Trustee an exclusive mandate to sell the
       Divestment Business in accordance with the procedure described in paragraph 24 in
       the Trustee Divestiture Period.
2.     BNPP shall be deemed to have complied with this commitment if, by the end of the
       Trustee Divestiture Period, BNPP has entered into a final binding sale and purchase
       agreement, if the Commission approves the Purchaser and the terms in accordance
                                                  33

    with the procedure described in paragraph 15 and if the closing of the sale of the
    Divestment Business takes place within a period not exceeding 3 months after the
    approval of the purchaser and the terms of sale by the Commission.
3.  In order to maintain the structural effect of the Commitments, BNPP shall, for a
    period of […] after the Effective Date, not acquire direct or indirect influence over
    the whole or part of the Divestment Business, unless the Commission has previously
    found that the structure of the market has changed to such an extent that the absence
    of influence over the Divestment Business is no longer necessary to render the
    proposed concentration compatible with the common market.
    Structure and definition of the Divestment Business
4.1 The Divestment Business consists of 100% of the shares of BNP Paribas Personal
    Finance Belgium S.A./N.V. with its registered office at Place de Brouckère n°2,
    1000 Bruxelles (“BNPP Personal Finance Belgium”) […].
4.2 The present legal and functional structure of the Divestment Business as operated to
    date is described in the Schedule. The Divestment Business, described in more detail
    in the Schedule, includes:
    (a)     All tangible and intangible assets (including intellectual property rights),
            which contribute to the current operation or are necessary to ensure the
            viability and competitiveness of the Divestment Business;
    (b)     All licenses, permits and authorisations issued by any governmental
            organisation for the benefit of the Divestment Business;
    (c)     All contracts, leases, commitments and customer orders of the Divestment
            Business; all customer, credit and other records of the Divestment Business
            (items referred to under (a)-(c) hereinafter collectively referred to as
            “Assets”);
    (d)     The Personnel; and
    (e)     The benefit, for a transitional period of […] after Closing and on terms and
            conditions equivalent to those at present afforded to the Divestment Business,
            of all current arrangements under which BNPP or Affiliated Undertakings
            supply products or services to the Divestment Business, as detailed in the
            Schedule, unless otherwise agreed with the Purchaser.
C.  RELATED COMMITMENTS
    Preservation of Viability, Marketability and Competitiveness
5.  From the Effective Date until Closing, BNPP shall preserve the economic viability,
    marketability and competitiveness of the Divestment Business, in accordance with
    good business practice, and shall minimize as far as possible any risk of loss of
    competitive potential of the Divestment Business. In particular BNPP undertakes:
    (a)     Not to carry out any act upon its own authority that might have a significant
            adverse impact on the value, management or competitiveness of the
                                                34

           Divestment Business or that might alter the nature and scope of activity, or
           the industrial or commercial strategy or the investment policy of the
           Divestment Business;
   (b)     To make available sufficient resources for the development of the Divestment
           Business, on the basis and continuation of the existing business plans;
   (c)     To take all reasonable steps, including appropriate incentive schemes (based
           on industry practice), to encourage all Key Personnel to remain with the
           Divestment Business.
   Hold-separate obligations of BNPP
6. BNPP commits, from the Effective Date until Closing, to keep the Divestment
   Business separate from the business it is retaining and to ensure that Key Personnel
   of the Divestment Business – including the Hold Separate Manager – have no
   involvement in any business retained and vice versa. BNPP shall also ensure that the
   Personnel does not report to any individual outside the Divestment Business.
   Moreover, BNPP commits itself to adopt all measures necessary to establish, as
   quickly as possible after the Decision, and in agreement with the acquirer or at the
   request of the Commission, a situation of full commercial independence from BNPP
   for the Divestment Business.
7. Until Closing, BNPP shall assist the Monitoring Trustee in ensuring that the
   Divestment Business is managed as a distinct and saleable entity separate from the
   businesses retained by the Parties. BNPP shall appoint a Hold Separate Manager
   who shall be responsible for the management of the Divestment Business, under the
   supervision of the Monitoring Trustee. The Hold Separate Manager shall manage the
   Divestment Business independently and in the best interest of the business with a
   view to ensuring its continued economic viability, marketability and competitiveness
   and its independence from the business retained by the Parties.
8. To ensure that the Divestment Business is held and managed as a separate entity the
   Monitoring Trustee shall exercise BNPP’s rights as shareholder in the Divestment
   Business (except for its rights for dividends that are due before Closing), with the
   aim of acting in the best interest of the business, determined on a stand-alone basis,
   as an independent financial investor, and with a view to fulfilling BNPP’s
   obligations under the Commitments. Furthermore, the Monitoring Trustee shall have
   the power to replace members of the supervisory board or non-executive directors of
   the board of directors, who have been appointed on behalf of BNPP. Upon request of
   the Monitoring Trustee, BNPP shall resign as member of the boards or shall cause
   such members of the boards to resign.
   Ring-fencing
9. BNPP shall implement all necessary measures to ensure that it does not after the
   Effective Date obtain any business secrets, know-how, commercial information, or
   any other information of a confidential or proprietary nature relating to the
   Divestment Business. In particular, the participation of the Divestment Business in a
   central information technology network shall be severed to the extent possible,
   without compromising the viability of the Divestment Business. BNPP may obtain
   information relating to the Divestment Business which is reasonably necessary for
                                               35

    the divestiture of the Divestment Business, or whose disclosure to BNPP is required
    by law.
    Non-solicitation clause/Non-competition clause
10. BNPP undertakes, subject to customary limitations, not to solicit, and to procure that
    Affiliated Undertakings do not solicit, the Key Personnel transferred with the
    Divestment Business for a period of […] after Closing. For a period of […] after
    Closing, with respect to any currently existing agreements between BNPP Personal
    Finance Belgium and any store chain or car dealer (the “Current Chains and
    Dealers”), BNPP undertakes not to enter into, and to procure that Affiliated
    Undertakings not enter into, any new agreement with any of the Current Chains and
    Dealers similar or equivalent to such existing agreements (it being understood that
    Alpha Credit will be entitled to pursue and renew any currently existing agreement
    with such Current Chains and Dealers).
    Due Diligence
11. In order to enable potential purchasers to carry out a reasonable due diligence of the
    Divestment Business, BNPP shall, subject to customary confidentiality assurances
    and dependent on the stage of the divestiture process:
    (a)     Provide to potential purchasers sufficient information as regards the
            Divestment Business;
    (b)     Provide to potential purchasers sufficient information relating to the
            Personnel and allow them reasonable access to the Personnel.
    Reporting
12. BNPP shall submit written reports in English on potential purchasers of the
    Divestment Business and developments in the negotiations with such potential
    purchasers to the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee no later than 10 days after
    the end of every month following the Effective Date (or otherwise at the
    Commission’s request).
13. BNPP shall inform the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee on the preparation
    of the data room documentation and the due diligence procedure and shall submit a
    copy of an information memorandum to the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee
    before sending the memorandum out to potential purchasers.
D.  THE PURCHASER
14. In order to ensure the immediate restoration of effective competition, the Purchaser,
    in order to be approved by the Commission, must:
    (a)     Be independent of and unconnected to the Parties;
    (b)     Have the financial resources, proven expertise and incentive to maintain and
            develop the Divestment Business as a viable and active competitive force in
            competition with the Parties and other competitors;
                                              36

    (c)     Be entitled to maintain the Master Card license;
    (d)     Neither be likely to create, in the light of the information available to the
            Commission, prima facie competition concerns nor give rise to a risk that the
            implementation of the Commitments will be delayed, and must, in particular,
            reasonably be expected to obtain all necessary approvals from the relevant
            regulatory authorities for the acquisition of the Divestment Business (the
            before-mentioned criteria for the purchaser hereafter the “Purchaser
            Requirements”).
15. The final sale and purchase agreement shall be conditional on the Commission’s
    approval.
    When BNPP has reached an agreement with a Purchaser, it shall submit a fully
    documented and reasoned proposal, including copy of the final agreement(s), to the
    Commission and the Monitoring Trustee. BNPP must be able to demonstrate to the
    Commission that the Purchaser meets the Purchaser Requirements and that the
    Divestment Business is being sold in a manner consistent with the Commitments.
    For the approval, the Commission shall verify that the Purchaser fulfils the Purchaser
    Requirements and that the Divestment Business is being sold in a manner consistent
    with the Commitments.
    The Commission may approve the sale of the Divestment Business without one or
    more Assets or parts of the Personnel, if this does not affect the viability and
    competitiveness of the Divestment Business after the sale, taking account of the
    proposed Purchaser.
E.  TRUSTEE
    I.      Appointment Procedure
16. BNPP shall appoint a Monitoring Trustee to carry out the functions specified in the
    Commitments for a Monitoring Trustee. If BNPP has not entered into a binding sales
    and purchase agreement one month before the end of the First Divestiture Period or
    if the Commission has rejected a purchaser proposed by BNPP at that time or
    thereafter, BNPP shall appoint a Divestiture Trustee to carry out the functions
    specified in the Commitments for a Divestiture Trustee. The appointment of the
    Divestiture Trustee shall take effect upon the commencement of the Extended
    Divestment Period.
17. The Trustee shall be independent of the Parties, possess the necessary qualifications
    to carry out its mandate, for example as an investment bank or consultant or auditor,
    and shall neither have nor become exposed to a conflict of interest. The Trustee shall
    be remunerated by BNPP in a way that does not impede the independent and
    effective fulfillment of its mandate. In particular, where the remuneration package of
    a Divestiture Trustee includes a success premium linked to the final sale value of the
    Divestment Business, the fee shall also be linked to a divestiture within the Trustee
    Divestiture Period.
    Proposal by BNPP
                                                37

18. No later than one week after the Effective Date, BNPP shall submit a list of one or
    more persons whom BNPP proposes to appoint as the Monitoring Trustee to the
    Commission for approval. The proposal shall contain sufficient information for the
    Commission to verify that the proposed Trustee fulfils the requirements set out in
    paragraph 17 and shall include:
    (a)      The full terms of the proposed mandate, which shall include all provisions
             necessary to enable the Trustee to fulfil its duties under these Commitments;
    (b)      The outline of a work plan which describes how the Trustee intends to carry
             out its assigned tasks.
    (c)      An indication whether the proposed Trustee is to act as both Monitoring
             Trustee and Divestiture Trustee or whether different trustees are proposed for
             the two functions.
    Approval or rejection by the Commission
19. The Commission shall have the discretion to approve or reject the proposed
    Trustee(s) and to approve the proposed mandate subject to any modifications it
    deems necessary for the Trustee to fulfil its obligations. If only one name is
    approved, BNPP shall appoint or cause to be appointed, the individual or institution
    concerned as Trustee, in accordance with the mandate approved by the Commission.
    If more than one name is approved, BNPP shall be free to choose the Trustee to be
    appointed from among the names approved. The Trustee shall be appointed within
    one week of the Commission’s approval, in accordance with the mandate approved
    by the Commission.
    New proposal by BNPP
20. If all the proposed Trustees are rejected, BNPP shall submit the names of at least two
    more individuals or institutions within one week of being informed of the rejection,
    in accordance with the requirements and the procedure set out in paragraphs 16 and
    19.
    Trustee nominated by the Commission
21. If all further proposed Trustees are rejected by the Commission, the Commission
    shall nominate a Trustee, whom BNPP shall appoint, or cause to be appointed, in
    accordance with a trustee mandate approved by the Commission.
    II.      Functions of the Trustee
22. The Trustee shall assume its specified duties in order to ensure compliance with the
    Commitments. The Commission may, on its own initiative or at the request of the
    Trustee or BNPP, give any orders or instructions to the Trustee in order to ensure
    compliance with the conditions and obligations attached to the Decision.
    Duties and obligations of the Monitoring Trustee
23. The Monitoring Trustee shall:
                                               38

(i)   Propose in its first report to the Commission a detailed work plan describing
      how it intends to monitor compliance with the obligations and conditions
      attached to the Decision;
(ii)  Oversee the on-going management of the Divestment Business with a view to
      ensuring its continued economic viability, marketability and competitiveness
      and monitor compliance by BNPP with the conditions and obligations
      attached to the Decision. To that end the Monitoring Trustee shall:
      (a)   Monitor the preservation of the economic viability, marketability and
            competitiveness of the Divestment Business, and the keeping separate
            of the Divestment Business from the business retained by BNPP, in
            accordance with paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Commitments;
      (b)   Supervise the management of the Divestment Business as a distinct and
            saleable entity, in accordance with paragraph 7 of the Commitments;
      (c)   (i) In consultation with BNPP, determine all necessary measures to
            ensure that BNPP does not, after the Effective Date, obtain any
            business secrets, know-how, commercial information, or any other
            information of a confidential or proprietary nature relating to the
            Divestment Business, in particular strive for the severing of the
            Divestment Business’ participation in a central information technology
            network to the extent possible, without compromising the viability of
            the Divestment Business, and (ii) decide whether such information may
            be disclosed to BNPP as the disclosure is reasonably necessary to allow
            BNPP to carry out the divestiture or as the disclosure is required by
            law;
      (d)   Monitor the splitting of assets and the allocation of Personnel between
            the Divestment Business and Affiliated Undertakings;
(iii) Assume the other functions assigned to the Monitoring Trustee under the
      conditions and obligations attached to the Decision;
(iv)  Propose to BNPP such measures as the Monitoring Trustee considers
      necessary to ensure BNPP’ compliance with the conditions and obligations
      attached to the Decision, in particular the maintenance of the full economic
      viability, marketability or competitiveness of the Divestment Business, the
      holding separate of the Divestment Business and the non-disclosure of
      competitively sensitive information;
(v)   Review and assess potential purchasers as well as the progress of the
      divestiture process and verify that, dependent on the stage of the divestiture
      process, (a) potential purchasers receive sufficient information relating to the
      Divestment Business and the Personnel, in particular by reviewing, if
      available, the data room documentation, the information memorandum and
      the due diligence process, and (b) potential purchasers are granted reasonable
      access to the Personnel;
                                          39

    (vi)    Provide to the Commission, sending BNPP a non-confidential copy at the
            same time, a written report within 15 days after the end of every month. The
            report shall cover the operation and management of the Divestment Business,
            so that the Commission can assess whether the Divestment Business is held
            in a manner consistent with the Commitments, and the progress of the
            divestiture process as well as potential purchasers. In addition to these
            reports, the Monitoring Trustee shall promptly report in writing to the
            Commission, sending BNPP a non-confidential copy at the same time, if it
            concludes on reasonable grounds that BNPP is failing to comply with these
            Commitments.
    (vii)   Within one week after receipt of the documented proposal referred to in
            paragraph 15, submit to the Commission a reasoned opinion as to the
            suitability and independence of the proposed purchaser and the viability of
            the Divestment Business after the sale and as to whether the Divestment
            Business is sold in a manner consistent with the conditions and obligations
            attached to the Decision, in particular, if relevant, whether the sale of the
            Divestment Business without one or more Assets or not all of the Personnel
            affects the viability of the Divestment Business after the sale, taking account
            of the proposed purchaser.
    Duties and obligations of the Divestiture Trustee
24. Within the Trustee Divestiture Period, the Divestiture Trustee shall sell […] the
    Divestment Business to a purchaser, provided that the Commission has approved
    both the purchaser and the final binding sale and purchase agreement in accordance
    with the procedure laid down in paragraph 15. The Divestiture Trustee shall include
    in the sale and purchase agreement such terms and conditions as it considers
    appropriate for an expedient sale in the Trustee Divestiture Period. In particular, the
    Divestiture Trustee may include in the sale and purchase agreement such customary
    representations and warranties and indemnities as are reasonably required to effect
    the sale. The Divestiture Trustee shall protect the legitimate financial interests of
    BNPP, subject to the Parties’ unconditional obligation to divest […] in the Trustee
    Divestiture Period.
25. In the Trustee Divestiture Period (or otherwise at the Commission’s request), the
    Divestiture Trustee shall provide the Commission with a comprehensive monthly
    report written in English on the progress of the divestiture process. Such reports shall
    be submitted within 15 days after the end of every month with a simultaneous copy
    to the Monitoring Trustee and a non-confidential copy to the Parties.
    III.    Duties and obligations of BNPP
26. BNPP shall provide and shall cause its advisors to provide the Trustee with all such
    cooperation, assistance and information as the Trustee may reasonably require to
    perform its tasks. The Trustee shall have full and complete access to any of BNPP’s
    or the Divestment Business’ books, records, documents, management or other
    personnel, facilities, sites and technical information necessary for fulfilling its duties
    under the Commitments and BNPP and the Divestment Business shall provide the
    Trustee upon request with copies of any document. BNPP and the Divestment
    Business shall make available to the Trustee one or more offices on their premises
                                                40

    and shall be available for meetings in order to provide the Trustee with all
    information necessary for the performance of its tasks.
27. BNPP shall provide the Monitoring Trustee with all managerial and administrative
    support that it may reasonably request on behalf of the management of the
    Divestment Business. This shall include all administrative support functions relating
    to the Divestment Business which are currently carried out at headquarters level.
    BNPP shall provide and shall cause its advisors to provide the Monitoring Trustee,
    on request, with the information submitted to potential purchasers, in particular give
    the Monitoring Trustee access to the data room documentation and all other
    information granted to potential purchasers in the due diligence procedure. BNPP
    shall inform the Monitoring Trustee on possible purchasers, submit a list of potential
    purchasers, and keep the Monitoring Trustee informed of all developments in the
    divestiture process.
28. BNPP shall grant or procure Affiliated Undertakings to grant comprehensive powers
    of attorney, duly executed, to the Divestiture Trustee to effect the sale, the Closing
    and all actions and declarations which the Divestiture Trustee considers necessary or
    appropriate to achieve the sale and the Closing, including the appointment of
    advisors to assist with the sale process. Upon request of the Divestiture Trustee,
    BNPP shall cause the documents required for effecting the sale and the Closing to be
    duly executed.
29. BNPP shall indemnify the Trustee and its employees and agents (each an
    “Indemnified Party”) and hold each Indemnified Party harmless against, and
    hereby agrees that an Indemnified Party shall have no liability to BNPP for any
    liabilities arising out of the performance of the Trustee’s duties under the
    Commitments, except to the extent that such liabilities result from the wilful default,
    recklessness, gross negligence or bad faith of the Trustee, its employees, agents or
    advisors.
30. At the expense of BNPP, the Trustee may appoint advisors (in particular for
    corporate finance or legal advice), subject to BNPP’ approval (this approval not to
    be unreasonably withheld or delayed) if the Trustee considers the appointment of
    such advisors necessary or appropriate for the performance of its duties and
    obligations under the Mandate, provided that any fees and other expenses incurred
    by the Trustee are reasonable. Should BNPP refuse to approve the advisors proposed
    by the Trustee, the Commission may approve the appointment of such advisors
    instead, after having heard BNPP. Only the Trustee shall be entitled to issue
    instructions to the advisors. Paragraph shall apply mutates mutandis. In the Trustee
    Divestiture Period, the Divestiture Trustee may use advisors who served BNPP
    during the Divestiture Period if the Divestiture Trustee considers this in the best
    interest of an expedient sale.
IV. Replacement, discharge and reappointment of the Trustee
31. If the Trustee ceases to perform its functions under the Commitments or for any
    other good cause, including the exposure of the Trustee to a conflict of interest:
    (a)      the Commission may, after hearing the Trustee, require BNPP to replace the
             Trustee; or
                                               41

    (b)     BNPP, with the prior approval of the Commission, may replace the Trustee.
32. If the Trustee is removed according to paragraph 31, the Trustee may be required to
    continue in its function until a new Trustee is in place to whom the Trustee has
    effected a full hand over of all relevant information. The new Trustee shall be
    appointed in accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraphs 16-21.
33. Beside the removal according to paragraph 31, the Trustee shall cease to act as
    Trustee only after the Commission has discharged it from its duties after all the
    Commitments with which the Trustee has been entrusted have been implemented.
    However, the Commission may at any time require the reappointment of the
    Monitoring Trustee if it subsequently appears that the relevant remedies might not
    have been fully and properly implemented.
F.  THE REVIEW CLAUSE
34. The Commission may, where appropriate, in response to a request from BNPP
    showing good cause and accompanied by a report from the Monitoring Trustee:
    (i)     Grant an extension of the time periods foreseen in the Commitments, or
    (ii)    Waive, modify or substitute, in exceptional circumstances, one or more of the
            undertakings in these Commitments.
    Where BNPP seeks an extension of a time period, it shall submit a request to the
    Commission no later than one month before the expiry of that period, showing good
    cause. Only in exceptional circumstances shall BNPP be entitled to request an
    extension within the last month of any period.
    Paris, on November 28, 2008
    ………………………………
    Michel Vial, Directeur du développement, Groupe BNP Paribas
    Duly authorized for and on behalf of BNPP
                                                42

              SCHEDULE – BNP Paribas Personal Finance Belgium
I.      Legal and functional structure of the Divestment Business
The divestment business consists of BNPP Personal Finance Belgium as operated to date
and described hereafter.
BNP Paribas Personal Finance Belgium is incorporated under the laws of Belgium, with its
registered office at Place de Brouckère 2, 1000 Bruxelles, Belgium, and registered with the
Legal Entity Registry at Bruxelles under number 0400.282.277. BNP Paribas Personal
Finance Belgium has also an office at Boulevard Adolphe Maxl 13/17, 1000 Bruxelles,
Belgium.
Key facts
            -   Created in 1996, following the acquisition of part of a portfolio of GIB and
                combined with UCBEL in 2008.
            -   More than 500.000 customers (including Fidexis subsidiary).
            -   Geographically spanning Belgium and Luxembourg.
            -   Multi-channel distribution strategy via retail networks, brokers, car dealers
                and via direct channels
Strategy
BNP Paribas Personal Finance will continue building on its leadership position in retail
finance by expanding its strong partnership with retailers ([…]) deals as well as numbers of
multimarks arrangements.Work will be continued on expanding business with brokers
(2006) as well as through our direct B to C channel such as the Internet (2006).
The ongoing quest for maximum efficiency will be maintained with special attention for
cost control.
The aim for excellence in credit cycle management is continued with a low risk approach
and further boost performance in credit management.
BNP Paribas Personal Finance Belgium SA/NV is organized around four business
segments:
Mortgage. BNP Paribas Personal Finance Belgium offers mortgage fixed-term amortizable
credits and bullet mortgage (in fine), and markets such mortgage loans through brokers.
Consumer loans. BNP Paribas Personal Finance Belgium offers fixed-term credits, and
markets consumer personal credits through brokers or dealer networks or through direct
marketing.
Revolving credit card issuing. BNP Paribas Personal Finance Belgium offers international
revolving credits cards and store/ hybrid store cards.
Credit card management services. BNPP Personal Finance Belgium also offers credit card
management services to the commercial partners with whom they cooperate for revolving
credit cards.
BNPP Personal Finance Belgium reached an outstanding of […] euros in 2007 (including
Luxemburg activities).
                                                  43

The Divestment Business would also include Fidexis
FIDEXIS (100% subsidiary of BNP Personal Finance Belgium SA/NV) is incorporated
under the laws of Belgium, with its registered office at Boulevard du Souverain 191, 1160
Bruxelles, Belgium, and registered with the Legal Entity Registry at Bruxelles under
number 0461.066.635. FIDEXIS has no other office.
FIDEXIS is organized around three business segments:
Personal loans. FIDEXIS offers consumer personal loans and linked credits on the point of
sale.
Revolving credit card issuing. FIDEXIS offers revolving credit cards, both for consumers
and small companies.
Credit card management services. FIDEXIS also offers credit card management services to
the commercial partners with whom they cooperate for revolving credit cards.
FIDEXIS reached an outstanding of […] euros in 2007
II.    Scope of the Divestment Business
                Following paragraph 4 of these Commitments, the Divestment Business
includes, but is not limited to:
(a)    the following main tangible assets:
       BNPP Personal Finance Belgium has no major tangible assets.
(b)    the following main intangible assets:
       Its stake in GEIE Cetelem Services.
       An equity interest of 40% in KBC Pinto Systems
       An equity interest of 100% in Fidexis SA
       […]
       Registered trademarks include: (i) for BNPP Personal Finance Belgium: Isis
       Finance, Odysea, Aero and (ii) for Fidexis: Fidexis, Isis, Isis Miles.
       (BNPP undertakes to grant the right to use its Aurora trademark for a transition
       period to be agreed upon with the Purchaser)
(c)    the following main licences, permits and authorisations:
       Authorization by the regulator to act as credit provider in Belgium and Luxembourg
       MasterCard licence
(d)    the following main contracts, agreements, leases, commitments and understandings:
                                                 44

         •   All contracts entered into by BNPP Paribas Personal Finance Belgium with
             suppliers and customers […]
(e) the following customer, credit and other records:
    All customers of BNPP Personal Finance Belgium and Fidexis, as well as any
    information related to the relationship between (i) such customers and (ii) BNPP
    Personal Finance Belgium and Fidexis (including, but not limited to, credit records,
    order and invoice history, etc.)
(f) the following Personnel:
    The employees dedicated to the Divestment Business, […]
(g) the following Key Personnel:
    […]
(h) the arrangements for the supply with the following products or services by BNPP:
    […]
    In order to prevent any issues which may arise from the reorganization of these IT
    support functions and unless otherwise agreed with the Purchaser, BNPP will
    maintain, on comparable terms to those granted to other subsidiaries of BNPP
    Personal Finance France, all the current arrangements described above with respect
    to IT support functions for a transitional period of up to […]. However, in the event
    that the Purchaser wishes to maintain any such arrangements for […], (i) if BNPP
    Paribas Personal Finance France does not intend to migrate its IT operations to a
    new IT system, BNPP will be required to maintain such arrangement on comparable
    terms to those granted to other subsidiaries of BNPP Personal Finance France, and
    (ii) if BNPP Personal Finance France intends to migrate its IT operations to a new IT
    system, BNPP will be required to negotiate in good faith a solution convenient to
    itself and the Purchaser.
    BNPP undertakes to provide the necessary funding to the Purchaser subject to the
    following conditions:
    -        Such necessary funding is granted on comparable conditions to those granted
             to other subsidiaries of BNPP Personal Finance France on the drawing date;
    -        The total amount provided by BNPP shall not exceed the level of funding
             induced by the outstanding on the Closing date;
    -        All existing drawings should be reimbursed within […] after the Closing
             date;
    -        BNPP shall (i) provide either these resources directly, (ii) provide the
             necessary guarantee to the Purchaser, or (iii) procure the funding by any
             other means convenient to BNPP and the Purchaser.
                                               45

     -      The Purchaser should present a risk compatible with market standards in
            these types of operations, i.e. should have an external rating not below A-. In
            the event that such external rating is not available, the Purchaser should have
            an equivalent internal BNPP rating (the model used for internal BNPP ratings
            has been approved by the French Regulator, and is commonly used to
            compute the group’s Basel 2 equity).
     -      The funding provided by BNPP shall strictly finance the outstanding
            generated by the Divestment Business. If the Purchaser were to find another
            source of funding as securitization or any other substitute, then it must
            immediately reimburse the total funding provided by BNPP.
III. Assets excluded from the scope of the Divestment Business
     N/A
                                               46
 <<--NEW VERSION-->>                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 27.10.2008
   In the published version of this decision, some               C(2008) 6421
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                     PUBLIC VERSION
   other confidential information. The omissions are
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                MERGER PROCEDURE
   general description.                                              ARTICLE 7(3) DECISION
To the notifying party:
Dear Madam,
Subject :        Case No COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas/Fortis
                 Request for derogation pursuant to Article 7(3) of Council Regulation
                 Nº 139/2004
1. Reference is made to the application of October 23, 2008 for a derogation from the
    suspension obligation provided for in Article 7 (1) of Council Regulation (EC) Nº
    139/2004 (the "EC Merger Regulation") with regard to the proposed acquisition by
    BNP Paribas S.A. ("BNP Paribas") of sole control over Fortis Bank SA/NV ("Fortis
    Bank Belgium"), Fortis Insurance Belgium SA/NV ("Fortis Insurance Belgium") and
    Fortis Banque Luxembourg S.A. ("Fortis Banque Luxembourg"), together the “Fortis
    Entities”, submitted on behalf of BNP Paribas, pursuant to Article 7 (3) of the EC
    Merger Regulation ("the Application").
2. Reference is further made to the Memorandum which was submitted to the European
    Commission to support the Application on October 24, 2008.
I. THE PARTIES AND THE TRANSACTION
3. BNP Paribas is a banking group listed on Euronext Paris, with operations in more
    than 85 countries across Europe, North and South America, Africa, the Middle East,
    and Asia.
4. BNP Paribas has three core banking businesses: retail banking, asset management
    and services (comprising asset management, private banking, securities, investments
    and brokerage online for individuals, insurance, real estate), and corporate and
    investment banking.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

5. The Fortis Entities provide banking services to individual, business and institutional
    customers in a large number of countries (with the exception of the Netherlands).
    Banking operations are centred in Belgium and Luxembourg. The Fortis Entities'
    core banking businesses are: retail banking, private banking, asset management, and
    merchant banking. The Fortis Entities are also active in the insurance sector in
    Belgium.
6. The Fortis Entities were formerly part of the Fortis Group, an international provider
    of banking and insurance services to individual, business and institutional customers.
7. Faced with mounting crisis and the need for immediate action, the governments of
    Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg announced on September 29, 2008 that
    they would invest €11.2 billion in the Fortis Group to ensure that Fortis' banking and
    insurance activities would continue to operate, as a result of which the Kingdom of
    Belgium acquired, through the 100% state-owned company Société Fédérale de
    Participations et d’Investissement, "SFPI", 49.93% of the issued share capital of
    Fortis Bank Belgium, while the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg agreed to grant a loan
    that would be mandatorily convertible into 49.9% of the share capital of Fortis
    Banque Luxembourg.
8.   Subsequently to this, on October 3, 2008 the government of the Netherlands
    announced that it would acquire 100% of Fortis Bank Nederland, thereby
    nationalizing the Dutch assets of the Group. This transaction replaced the previously
    announced investment by the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
9. On October 9, 2008, the government of Belgium, BNP and the Fortis Group entered
    into a Memorandum of Understanding according to which BNP Paribas will acquire
    control of the operations of Fortis in Belgium and Luxembourg, as well as Fortis'
    international banking franchises, for a total consideration of approximately €[…]
    billion (the "Transaction").
10. The Transaction will be completed in several steps. For the purpose of this decision,
    the following steps appear to be directly relevant:
     On October 10, 2008, the Belgian government announced that SFPI would acquire a
     further 50% plus one share in the outstanding share capital of Fortis Bank Belgium,
     as a result of which its shareholding was raised to the level of 99.93%. Fortis Bank
     Belgium in turn holds 100% of the share capital of Fortis Banque Luxembourg. At
     this stage, the share capital of Fortis Insurance Belgium is held 100% by Fortis
     Insurance N.V.
     On December 4, 2008 subject to satisfaction or waiver of certain conditions
     precedent, including merger control clearance by the Commission and other
     regulatory authorisations:
            SFPI will contribute in kind to BNP Paribas 54.55% of the share capital of
            and voting rights in Fortis Bank Belgium. SFPI will receive newly-issued
            shares representing 8.82% of the issued share capital of BNP Paribas;
            simultaneously, BNP Paribas will purchase 100% of the issued share capital
            of Fortis Insurance Belgium from Fortis Insurance N.V.
                                                 2

      Subject to approval by BNP Paribas shareholders, which is expected to be obtained
      prior to mid-December 2008, SFPI will contribute in kind to BNP Paribas shares
      representing 20.39% of the issued share capital of Fortis Bank Belgium and SFPI
      will receive 32,982,760 newly-issued shares of BNP.
11. In addition, according to the notify party, the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg will
    convert into 49.9% of the share capital of Fortis Banque Luxembourg the € 2.4
    billion it agreed to invest in this entity on 29 September, 2008, in the form of a
    mandatorily convertible loan. Subject to approval by BNP Paribas shareholders,
    which is expected to be obtained prior to mid-December 2008, the Grand-Duchy of
    Luxembourg will contribute in kind to BNP Paribas shares representing 16.57% of
    the issued share capital of Fortis Banque Luxembourg and it will receive 11,717,549
    newly-issued shares of BNP Paribas.
12. Therefore, the contemplated Transaction consists in the acquisition by BNP Paribas
    of sole control of:
          (i)     Fortis Bank Belgium, by means of the purchase of 74.94% of the issued
                  share capital from the Kingdom of Belgium;
          (ii)    Fortis Banque Luxembourg, through Fortis Bank Belgium which would
                  hold 50.1% of the issued share capital prior to closing; in addition, BNP
                  would acquire 16.57% of the issued share capital from the Grand-Duchy
                  of Luxembourg;
          (iii)   Fortis Insurance Belgium, by means of the purchase of 100% of the issued
                  share capital from Fortis Insurance N.V.
13. As a result of the acquisition of sole control of the Fortis Entities, BNP Paribas will
    acquire the following operations:
          (i)     Retail banking networks in Belgium, Luxemburg, Poland, France and
                  Germany as well as a financial services joint venture with An Post
                  (Postbank) offering current/savings accounts in Ireland;
          (ii)    Merchant banking activities outside the Netherlands;
          (iii)   Private banking services outside the Netherlands;
          (iv)    Investment management activities (including a large part of the former
                  ABN AMRO Asset Management activity1); and
          (v)     Fortis’ insurance business in Belgium.
1 This is without prejudice to any consequences deriving from the implementation or failure to implement
    the commitments agreed in Case COMP/M.4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO assets.
                                                       3

14. Following the transaction, BNP Paribas will control the majority of the voting rights
    and will thus be in a position to appoint the majority of board members of the Fortis
    Entities' corporate bodies. Therefore, the transaction qualifies as a concentration
    within the meaning of Article 3 (1) b of the EC Merger Regulation.
II. THE COMMUNITY DIMENSION
15. In 2007, BNP Paribas' worldwide turnover was € 92,376 million. Its Community-
    wide turnover was € […] million and its EFTA-wide turnover was € […] million.
16. The turnover of the Fortis Entities in 2007 was €100,962 million worldwide, € […]
    million Community-wide and € […] million EFTA-wide2.
17. BNP Paribas achieves more than two-thirds of its Community-wide turnover in
    France while the Fortis Entities achieve more than two-thirds of their Community-
    wide turnover in Belgium. Therefore, the present transaction has a Community
    dimension pursuant to Article 1 (2) of the Merger Regulation.
III. THE APPLICATION FOR DEROGATION
18. BNP Paribas submits that the Fortis Entities are faced with dramatic and unparalleled
    financial difficulties, which require BNP to be allowed to carry out certain measures
    before the adoption of a final Commission decision under the EC Merger Regulation.
19. In order to handle the high levels of financial risk which arise during the transitional
    period from now until completion of the Transaction, the Parties have drawn up draft
    rules for a Steering Committee which will:
      • scrutinize the evolution of the Fortis Entities' risks (including credit risks,
         market risks, liquidity risks and operational risks) during this transitional period;
      • take, in agreement with the Fortis Entities’ management and the Belgian
         authorities, all appropriate measures with respect to the management and
         operations of the Fortis Entities that will be required by the financial crisis,
         including the transfer or restructuring of any structured credit portfolio lines, the
         transfer of interests or activities or any modification of the share capital of the
         Fortis Entities;
      • approve the possible secondment of BNP Paribas employees to the Fortis Entities
         as a temporary measure. These employees might have key positions, in
         particular, in the Fortis Entities' marketplace operations or in support desk
         services, although they will not act as managers.
20. The Steering Committee will be composed of eight members, among which four
    representatives of BNP Paribas and four representatives of Fortis Bank Belgium. It
1. The turnover of the Fortis Entities has still to be adjusted to take into account the
    2007 turnover achieved by the asset management operations of ABN AMRO which
    are included in the scope of the Transaction.
                                                  4

    will meet at least once a week and decisions will be taken by a simple majority of
    votes present or represented. Working groups, composed of representatives of the
    operational services and the risk monitoring departments of BNP Paribas and the
    Fortis Entities, will be set up to assist the Steering Committee. The members of the
    working groups will minimize any exchange of sensitive information to what is
    strictly necessary. In particular, the information exchanged will not include specific
    information relating to identified clients of the Fortis Entities'. Moreover the number
    of BNP Paribas employees involved will be limited to what is strictly necessary.
21. As the Steering Committee will decide by simple majority, BNP Paribas will thus be
    in a position to veto any decisions taken by the Steering Committee. This implies the
    possible exercise of a decisive influence over the Fortis Entities and, hence, the early
    implementation of the Transaction before a possible clearance decision is issued by
    the European Commission.
22. In order to proceed as indicated above in due respect of the Merger Regulation, a
    positive response to BNP Paribas' request for the granting of derogation from the
    standstill obligation provided for in Article 7 (1) is required.
23. According to BNP Paribas its request is justified, among other reasons, in view of:
     (i) The unparalleled systemic financial crisis in which BNP Paribas and the Fortis
     Entities currently have to operate.
     In this regard, the information submitted to the Commission shows that the solvency
     and liquidity positions of the Fortis Entities have rapidly deteriorated in recent
     weeks and that BNP Paribas is required to lend very significant amounts of money
     to the Fortis Entities on a daily basis.
     (ii) […].
     The split up of the Fortis group has separated some asset portfolios (owned by the
     Belgian entities of the Fortis Group) from the employees (traders) in charge of the
     management of these portfolios (who now work for Fortis Bank Netherlands). As a
     consequence, the Fortis Entities now hold a very significant volume of asset
     portfolios, which have encountered very significant reductions in market value in
     the last months, without the required employees to manage these portfolios. Under
     the present circumstances, it is extremely difficult for the Fortis Entities to replace
     these employees.
     Given the transitory character of its investment, the Belgian government is very
     likely not in a position to take, by itself, appropriate measures to handle the
     financial risks incurred by the Fortis Entities during this transitory period.
     (iii) The need to adopt, as soon as possible, all the measures required in order for the
     merged entity to comply with regulatory financial ratios immediately upon closing
     of the transaction.
     BNP Paribas argues that it is absolutely essential for it to have the clearest possible
     understanding of the financial risks associated with the Fortis Entities’ operations.
     This is required, among other things, in order to start considering as soon as
     possible all the actions BNP Paribas will have to take after December 4 (anticipated
                                                  5

      closing date) in order for the merged entity to comply with regulatory financial
      ratios immediately upon closing.
IV. THE CONDITIONS FOR DEROGATION PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 7(3) OF
THE EC MERGER REGULATION
24. Pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Merger Regulation, a concentration falling under that
    Regulation shall not be implemented either before its notification or until it has been
    declared compatible with the common market. Pursuant to Article 7(3) of the Merger
    Regulation, the Commission may, on the basis of a reasoned request, grant a
    derogation from the obligation imposed by Article 7(1).
25. Derogation from the obligation to suspend concentrations is granted only
    exceptionally, normally in circumstances where the suspension required under the EC
    Merger Regulation would cause serious damage to the undertakings concerned by a
    concentration, or to a third party.
26. In deciding upon the request, the Commission must take into account, inter alia, the
    effects of the suspension on one or more undertakings concerned by the
    concentration or on a third party and the threat to competition posed by the
    concentration.
A. THE TRANSACTION FALLS UNDER THE SUSPENSION OBLIGATION
PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 7 (1) OF THE EC MERGER REGULATION
27. Given that the proposed transaction appears to qualify as a concentration with
    Community dimension within the meaning of the EC Merger Regulation, it falls
    under the suspension obligation laid down in Article 7(1) of the EC Merger
    Regulation.
B. THE EFFECTS OF THE SUSPENSION ON THE UNDERTAKINGS
CONCERNED AND THIRD PARTIES
28. According to the information provided by the notifying Party, which appears
    plausible a priori, the Fortis Entities are in serious financial distress. In the current
    context of major financial crisis there are serious risks of further rapid deterioration.
29. The derogation appears appropriate as otherwise there may be a considerable effect
    on Fortis, on its customers and creditors, as well as on BNP. In the current
    circumstances and according to the information submitted by BNP, Fortis is not able
    to finance its liquidity needs via the inter-banking lending market, but relies on BNP
    for providing very significant volumes of liquidity on a daily basis. Without being
    able to turn to BNP for those amounts, there would be considerable effects on Fortis'
    financial position. If BNP were not able to monitor the risks incurred by Fortis, BNP
    itself may not be able to monitor its own risks and the risks incurred with the lending
    to Fortis. Therefore, in the current circumstances, the absence of a derogation in
    relation to the risk monitoring measures requested could have very significant effects
    on Fortis, on Fortis customers and creditors, as well as on BNP.
30. Similarly, Fortis is exposed to very significant risks in relation to the asset portfolios
    which have already lost a very substantial part of their market value over the last
    months. […].
                                                  6

31. The Belgian State, as an interim owner, would not seem to be in a position to carry
    out the measures envisaged instead of BNP.
32. In addition, the inability of BNP Paribas to reliably assess and manage its position
    post-Transaction might lead BNP Paribas to consider abandoning the transaction. If
    BNP Paribas were to abandon the transaction, the impact of such a development,
    could be considerable. Such a development could result in the need for further State
    intervention, which would be extremely onerous for the public authorities concerned
    and would create greater risks of distortions of competition than the alternative
    proposed by BNP Paribas in return for an outcome which would remain highly
    uncertain. The withdrawal of BNP Paribas from the transaction would also risk
    significantly affecting consumer confidence in the financial markets in general.
C. THE THREAT TO COMPETITION POSED BY THE CONCENTRATION
33. On the basis of the provisional information submitted by BNP Paribas, the Parties'
    combined market share exceeds 15% in five markets:
      - the Belgian leasing market, where the new entity's market share will increase from
      [20-30]% to [30-40]%;
      - the French leasing market, where the Parties’ market share will increase from [10-
      20]% to [10-20]%;
      - the Belgian market for consumer loans, where the Parties' market share will
      increase from [20-30]% to [20-30]%;.
      - the Belgian market for mortgages, where the Parties' market share will marginally
      increase, from [20-30]% to [20-30]%;
      - the Belgian market for life insurance, where the Parties' market share will
      marginally increase, from [20-30]% to [20-30]%.
34. In the Belgian leasing market, the new entity will still face competition inter alia
    from three important operators (ING, KBC and Dexia) each having a market share of
    approximately 20%.
35. In the French leasing market, the new entity will face competition inter alia from
    Crédit Agricole, Natixis and Société Général, each having a market share of
    approximately 20%.
36. In the Belgian market for consumer loans, the new entity will face competition inter
    alia from KBC and ING, each having a market share of approximately 20%.
37. In the Belgian market for mortgages, the new entity will face competition inter alia
    from KBC, ING and Dexia, each having a market share of approximately 20%.
38. In the Belgian market for life insurance, the new entity will face competition inter
    alia from four significant operators (AXA, Ethias, Dexia, KBC), each having a
    market share of 10 to 15%.
39. From the above, it results that (i) the increment in the Parties' market share is limited
    and, (ii) the resulting entity will face strong competitors including, in Belgium,
                                                 7

    Dexia, AXA (for life insurance), ING and KBC. Therefore, on the basis of the
    information provided by the Parties, the transaction is not likely, prima facie, to
    significantly impede effective competition within the EEA.
D. BALANCE OF INTERESTS
40. Based on the above it appears that the suspension obligation could seriously affect
    the financial interests of the parties, of Fortis customers and moreover may have an
    impact on the financial system in general. The benefits following from the derogation
    considerably outweigh any potential adverse effects that it may have on one or more
    of the parties or on any third party. Moreover, the scope of the measures as described
    in paragraphs 19 and 20, concerning the Steering Committee, the Working Groups
    and BNP Paribas employees, appears to be limited to what is necessary for BNP
    Paribas to have a clear understanding of the financial risks associated with the Fortis
    Entities operations and to make sure that vacant positions within those entities are
    filled by competent employees during the period before the adoption of a final
    Commission decision under the EC Merger Regulation. Therefore, the proposed risk
    management framework can be deemed to be reasonably necessary to safeguard or
    restore the viability of the Fortis Entities and thereby contribute to ensuring financial
    stability.
V. CONCLUSION
41. The Commission considers that the reasons given for derogation from the suspension
    obligations meet the requirements set out in Article 7(3) of the EC Merger
    Regulation.
42. On the basis of the above considerations, and in accordance with Article 7(3) of the
    EC Merger Regulation, BNP Paribas is granted a derogation from the obligations
    imposed by Article 7 (1) of the Merger Regulation in accordance with its application
    and until the Commission takes a final decision under the relevant provisions of the
    EC Merger Regulation.
                                                        For the Commission
                                                        (signed)
                                                        Siim Kallas
                                                        Vice-President
                                                  8
