                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                 Brussels, 23.11.2009
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2009) D/9402-9403
  In the published version of this decision, some
                                                                 C(2009)9392
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                       PUBLIC VERSION
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                  MERGER PROCEDURE
  general description.                                              ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.5495 - UNICREDIT/ BANCA IMI/ EUROTLX SIM
               JV
               Notification of 16 October 2009 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
               Regulation No 139/20041
1. On 16 October 2009, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
     concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by
     which the undertakings Unicredit S.p.A ("UniCredit", Italy) and Banca IMI S.p.A.
     ("Banca IMI", Italy) intend to transform the existing joint venture TLX S.p.A.
     ("TLX") into a full-function joint venture, EuroTLX Società di Intermediazione
     S.p.A. ("EuroTLX SIM"), within the meaning of Article 3(4) of the Council
     Regulation.
I.     THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
2. UniCredit is an international financial institution with registered office in Rome and
     listed on the Milan Stock Exchange. It offers a wide range of banking and financial
     services in several European countries, including retail and corporate banking services
     as well as investment banking and asset management.
3. Banca IMI, a company of the Intesa Sanpaolo Group, is an Italian investment bank
     that operates on domestic and international markets.
4. The operation under review consists in the creation of EuroTLX SIM as a for-profit
     commercial entity resulting from the transformation of the pre-existing joint venture
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

    TLX into a full function joint venture, which will operate as an investment firm in
    charge of the management of a trading platform named EuroTLX.
II.   CONCENTRATION
5. The share capital of TLX is currently held for 50% by UniCredit and for 50% by Banca
    IMI, who jointly control the joint venture. This shareholding and control structure will
    continue to apply following the transaction. TLX currently manages two platforms for
    the trading of financial instruments named TLX and EuroTLX,
6. Once created, EuroTLX SIM will have sufficient resources to operate independently on
    the market, applying a revenue based model for trading and other services, operate on a
    commercial basis vis-à-vis its parents, be open to all market operators which wish to
    become members and operate on a lasting basis.
7. The operation therefore constitutes a concentration in the sense of Article 3(4) of the
    Merger Regulation and paragraph 109 of the Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
    than EUR 5 billion2 (UniCredit EUR 66,298 million, Banca IMI EUR 35,793 million).
    Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million
    (UniCredit, EUR […] million, Banca IMI EUR […] million), but they do not achieve
    more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the
    same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension.
IV.     RELEVANT MARKETS
9. As indicated, TLX currently manages two platforms for the trading of financial
    instruments: (i) a "regulated market" named TLX, and; (ii) a "Multilateral Trading
    Facility" ("MTF") named Euro TLX, both of which notions are defined in Directive
    2004/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on markets
    in financial instruments ("MiFID"). Upon completion TLX will change its name to
    EuroTLX SIM and will manage exclusively the MTF named Euro TLX.
10. UniCredit and Banca IMI, the parent companies of TLX, provide trading services in
    financial instruments as well as post-trading services. Such activities are vertically
    related to those of the joint venture.
11. Therefore, the assessment of the operation needs to be carried out in respect of the
    activity of TLX, broadly speaking the management of a platform for the trading of
    financial instruments, as well as in respect of the vertically related trading and post-
    trading services.
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation.
                                                        2

IV.1. Multilateral platforms for the trading of financial instruments between qualified
counterparties
Relevant product market
Regulatory framework and views of the Parties
12. Upon completion of the operation, EuroTLX will operate exclusively in secondary
    inter-dealer (B2B) trading as an MTF retail platform focusing on government, corporate
    and "branded" bonds, that is debt instruments issued by commercial financial
    institutions. It currently has market share essentially in Italian securities but also trades
    non-Italian instruments and has the ambition to expand its range of offerings.
13. The relevant economic activity raised by this case takes place after the admission of
    issued financial instruments to secondary trading by the platform concerned3. In this
    phase the various providers of market infrastructure allow trading to take place on third
    party account between qualified purchasers and sellers ("members"), according to the
    set of rules which they have defined.
14. The Parties in the notification defended a wide market definition, consisting of all
    companies which organize and manage venues where financial instruments are traded
    and explicitly covering both regulated markets and MTFs. They acknowledged the
    possibility of segmenting the market between platforms which trade equities and those
    which trade bonds.
15. The Parties also put forward an alternative, wider market definition which would
    encompass also bilateral trading via so-called "systematic internalisers"4 and "over the
    counter trading" ("OTC"), concepts equally defined under MiFID. In such instances,
    investment firms enter into every trade on their own account and not as a riskless
    counterparty interposed between the buyer and the seller. Transactions carried out on
    an OTC basis are normally ad-hoc, irregular and carried out with wholesale
    counterparties as part of a business relationship which is itself characterised by
    dealings above standard market size5.
16. Under MiFID, both "regulated markets" and "MTFs" are multilateral systems bringing
    together or facilitating the bringing together of multiple third-party buying and selling
    interests in financial instruments in the system according to non discretionary rules.
    Regulated markets are, however, subject to a wider array of rules and management
    requirements and, therefore higher costs, than MTFs. In addition, MTFs can be operated
    by both investment firms and market operators (concepts defined by MiFID), whereas
    regulated markets can only be operated by market operators.
3   Secondary trading takes place after the initial issuance of securities and consists in investors
    purchasing financial instruments from other investors who already hold these instruments and wish to
    sell them.
4   MiFID., article 4
5   ibid., recital 53
                                                       3

17. According to recital 6 of MiFID, "definitions of regulated market and MTF should be
    introduced and closely aligned with each other to reflect the fact that they represent
    the same organised trading functionality. The definitions should exclude bilateral
    systems where an investment firm enters into every trade on own account and not as
    a riskless counterparty interposed between the buyer and seller."
18. Finally, as indicated by the Parties, trading venues may have an interest in limiting
    access to some typologies of investors. These restrictions can be explicit (e.g. by
    indicating the kind of operator admitted) and/or implicit (e.g. by imposing a
    minimum volume for transaction). On this basis, trading platforms could be further
    segmented into retail platforms or venues where small size orders placed by
    investment firms operating for retail clients are admitted (which should not be
    confused with the bilateral systems open to retail investors themselves) and wholesale
    platforms which are only accessible to financial institutions placing large size orders.
    According to the Parties the average retail trading size in bonds is usually lower than
    € 50,000 whereas at wholesale level the average size of the orders is more than € 1
    million. Under Italian legislation, wholesale markets are those venues where the
    operators are trading on own account or on the account of third parties admitted to the
    same venue. The minimum tradable size is €500 000. MTS is currently the most
    important wholesale market for multilateral rule-based trading in Italian and foreign
    bonds. TLX and EuroTLX, as well as Borsa Italiana's MOT system are retail markets
    for bonds.
Results of the market investigation
19. The Commission has not previously decided on the relevant market in a case
    involving stock exchanges or alternative trading platforms. However, in case
    M.35116, the market investigation favoured a division of the market between equities
    and bonds and further favoured the exclusion of bilateral trading from the definition
    of the relevant market. The market investigation in the present case confirmed the
    relevance of both of these distinctions.
20. Concerning the question of whether or not multilateral trading of bonds in regulated
    markets and in MTFs constitute one single segment, as the parties suggest, or two
    separate segments, most respondents to the market investigation confirmed that this
    distinction is not of primary importance and that therefore a single market comprising
    regulated markets and MTFs could in the circumstances of the present case be
    assumed.
21. In defining the market for the operation of trading platforms it should be borne in
    mind that, as the market investigation has shown, platforms only actually compete at
    any given time for order flow in those individual instruments which are admitted to
    trading on the platform in question. Since the demand to sell a particular instrument
    is specific to the instrument concerned (assuming it is already held and therefore
    excluding short-selling) and at least a part of the demand to buy is similarly specific,
    buyers and sellers can only meet on a platform actually offering trading in that
    instrument. On this basis, markets could be defined narrowly on the basis of
    individual instruments traded.
6   COMP M.3511 Wiener Böerse et al./Budapest Stock Exchange/Budapest Commodity Exchange/Keler/JV
                                                     4

22. However, for reasons of scope and scale individual platforms tend to offer services
    across a large range of similar instruments. From a supply perspective, as indicated in
    the notification, the obstacle to offer trading in instruments not currently traded but
    which share many characteristics with those that are may be very low. The more
    dissimilar the instruments are, however, the greater this obstacle becomes. For this
    reason platforms tend to offer trading in a cluster of instruments which share similar
    properties such as, in this instance, bonds issued by Italian institutions. Supply side
    considerations may therefore be taken to imply markets broader than the specific
    instruments actually traded, the precise limits of which nonetheless need to be
    ascertained on a case-by-case basis.
23. The market investigation in the present case confirmed, however, that the nature of the
    instruments traded was not the sole criterion relevant to the market definition, since in
    the case of government bonds some platforms such as MTS are specialized in trading
    very large sizes on a wholesale basis between entities which also participate in the
    primary market, whereas TLX trades retail size trades which are on average over 100
    times smaller. Respondents to the market investigation confirmed that MTS and TLX
    should be seen as not competing with each other but rather operating in separate
    relevant markets.
24. On this basis, three segments could be identified within which the activity of TLX is
    presently concentrated, namely multilateral trading platforms (comprising both
    regulated markets and MTFs) for (i) Italian government bonds traded in retail size;
    (ii) Italian corporate bonds and (iii) Italian branded debt.
25. The market investigation indicated that competition needed to be assessed based on
    the actual range of instruments traded and therefore the competitive interaction
    between different trading platforms competing for trading in the same instrument. On
    the supply side, account needed to be taken of the ease with which a platform could
    offer trading in new instruments but also of the probability that it would capture
    sufficient liquidity in that instrument for price formation to be efficient and therefore
    for traders to have an incentive to use the platform for the instrument in question.
26. Supply side considerations would broaden the relevant product market in particular
    where many of the entities potentially wanting to trade the new instrument were
    already members of the platform wishing to offer such trading. Where a significant
    segment of demand was not already present on the platform, the incentive to offer
    new instruments in isolation was likely to be small.
27. Since TLX and its competitors typically offer trading services in a similar set of
    instruments, supply side considerations can be held in this case indeed to result in
    wider markets than would result from consideration of the demand side alone. In
    particular, TLX offers trading services in retail-size demand for Italian government
    securities, in Italian corporate debt and in Italian branded debt. On all of these
    segments it also competes with MOT and Hi-MTF, these being the only entities cited
    by respondents to the market investigation as being in actual competition with TLX.
28. On this basis, a single overall market could be identified for multilateral trading
    platform services in Italian debt securities, comprising retail-sized trade in
    government securities and all trade in corporate and branded debt securities, to the
    exclusion therefore of wholesale trade in Italian government debt. The view of the
    Parties that the relevant market might comprise a wider set of platforms, including
                                                    5

    those which do not currently offer trading in the same range of instruments as TLX,
    found no support in the market investigation and therefore can be excluded.
29. The precise market definition can, however, be left open as the transaction does not
    raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the Common Market even on the
    basis of the narrowest possible market segments.
30. Although TLX is active also on other market segments namely in the trading of non-
    Italian debt securities, affected markets in such segments do not arise due to its
    market share which is […].
Geographic market
31. As regards the geographic scope of the relevant market, the Parties note the existence of
    national regulatory authorities, precedents established by the Italian competition
    authority before the entry into force of MiFID and the fact that domestic members of
    trading venues still generate more volume in such infrastructures than foreign members
    as factors that could lead to the conclusion that competition in the management of
    platforms for the trade of financial instruments takes place, at least as regards Italy and
    with the possible exception of wholesale trading in Italian government bonds, mainly at
    a national scale.
32. However, on the other side, the Parties consider that EuroTLX has all the legal and
    regulatory requisites to become European in scope. It is already the case that investment
    firms from other member States are members of TLX and make use of it for trading. In
    particular large trading firms consider the main European trading venues as
    interchangeable in respect of the instruments which can be traded on them. Likewise
    Italian firms may accede to foreign trading venues for trading both foreign and Italian
    instruments. In addition, trading firms frequently offer their services on a delocalized
    basis so that clients from all over Europe have no technological obstacles to access any
    trading platform they may wish to use.
33. The results of the market investigation show that retail-sized fixed income trading in
    Italian debt securities is mostly carried out by domestic trading members on domestic
    platforms, although there are no legal or technical barriers limiting cross border
    competition but only the barrier that results from the fact that liquidity and retail demand
    for Italian bonds is mainly located in Italy. Thus, in practice, trade of Italian bonds
    outside Italy is limited – although, according to some market participants, it may be
    increasing and it would appear that entities located abroad who wish to trade Italian debt
    instruments in general do not in general have access to economically equivalent
    alternative ways of doing so in other jurisdictions but are constrained to make use of the
    same platforms offering such trading as do Italian investment firms, namely TLX, MOT
    and Hi-MTF.
34. In this sense, therefore, retail-sized multilateral trading services in Italian bonds may be
    provided in a market which is notionally wider in scope than Italy (as there are no other
    national markets outside of Italy for the same service but with differing conditions of
    competition) even if in practice the essential part of demand is national.
35. There is, however, no need to conclude on the relevant geographic market in this case,
    as the proposed transaction does not result in serious doubts as to its compatibility with
    the common market on the basis of any of the possible product market segmentations
                                                    6

    outlined above, whether at national, EU/EEA or indeed worldwide level. In addition, as
    regards platforms for the trading of Italian bonds for which the demand is presently
    mainly located in Italy, the geographic scope of this activity is neutral to the competitive
    assessment as the joint venture's position and that of its main competitors would be
    essentially the same at national, EU/EEA and worldwide level.
IV.2. Trading services
Product market
36. In case M.3511, trading services were defined as intermediary activities consisting of
    the services the banks and other investment service providers offer to their customers
    with regard to trading in securities. The parties submitted that despite the difference in
    respect of the legal form of the transaction, trading in securities on customers' account
    and trading in securities on own account are the same activity. Furthermore they
    submitted that intermediary services with regard to trading on a regulated trading
    platform and OTC are interchangeable. The market definition was left open.
37. Both UniCredit and Intesa Sanpaolo carry out trading activities in equities and bonds on
    their own and their customers' account. However only the provision of trading services
    on customers' account is an activity upstream to EuroTLX SIM's activity, particularly as
    regards retail or small ticket size trading in bonds.
38. The assessment will therefore focus on this narrower segment, leaving open the question
    of whether wider markets can be defined.
Geographic market
39. In case M.3511 the geographic market definition was left open. In the case at hand,
    although the parties admit that under a conservative approach the market for the
    provision of trading services could be still considered national in scope, they favour an
    European-wide market definition based on the cross border nature of this economic
    activity as well as on the fact that the services provided by trading firms are accessible
    by clients from all over Europe. In fact both Unicredit and Intesa Sanpolo offer their
    services through internet to clients resident in different countries.
40. It can nonetheless be noted that the relevant upstream market relates to trading in Italian
    bonds, the essential part of the demand for which is, in practice, and as already noted,
    national in scope, and not to trading more generally, that is including services provided
    in respect of instruments which are not, or only minimally, traded or potentially tradable
    on TLX. It would therefore seem inconsistent to determine a wider geographic market
    for these upstream services than exists for the services provided by TLX itself.
41. In the present case, however, the market definition can again be left open as the
    operation does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market,
    regardless of the geographic scope of the upstream market in question.
                                                    7

IV.3 Post-trading services
Product market
42. According to the Parties, the post-trading sector encompasses the different functions that
    intervene between the stage of agreeing to a trade, at which moment the parties to it are
    legally obligated to consummate the trade, and the moment at which the securities and
    cash accounts of the buyer and seller are debited or credited respectively.
43. More precisely, as indicated in the notification, the post-trading process is usually split
    into the following phases:
        -        Trade matching
        Trade matching is the activity consisting in assessing the consistency of the terms
        of trade of the buyer with those of the seller, thus preventing unintentional errors.
        Trades executed on electronic order books are typically pre-matched by the same
        trading system and then automatically forwarded to the Securities Settlement
        System ("SSS"), with the exception of OTC trading which may require "manual"
        checks.
         -       Clearing and settlement
        Clearing can be defined as the process of calculating the mutual obligations for the
        exchange of securities and cash, whereas settlement refers to the final transfer of
        securities from the seller to the buyer and of funds from the buyer to the seller.
        Although in certain instances trading platforms make use of the services of a central
        counterparty for clearing, this is not the case on TLX. Nonetheless the Parties may
        intervene as clearing members on behalf of entities which trade in their own name
        but have elected to have recourse to a third party for the purposes of clearing.
        Positions in registered securities are normally ultimately settled at a Central
        Securities Depositary (CSD). Nonetheless, members of a trading platform can also
        elect to have their positions settled by an agent which holds their securities account
        and conducts operations in the CSD only on an omnibus (i.e. net) basis.
        -        Custody services
        Custody services comprise a number of services performed in relation to
        outstanding positions in securities on an ongoing basis rather than in relation to
        specific transactions, including such items as payment of dividends and coupons,
        stock splits, rights issues, voting (for equity securities with voting rights) and so on.
44. In the case at hand, the vertically related services are provided exclusively on an agency
    basis by the Parties acting as a general clearing agent, settlement agency, and/or
    custodian. In case 38.096 under Article 82, the Commission distinguished agency (or
    "secondary") settlement from so-called primary settlement which is carried out in the
                                                    8

    CSD7. In precedents under the Merger Regulation the market definition has been left
    open.
45. The Unicredit Group […] with the sole exception of its subsidiary […].
46. Once again it needs to be observed that the vertically related activities in clearing,
    settlement and custody relate in principle only to the instruments traded on TLX and
    that similar arguments as to market definition apply as already considered in respect of
    trading services, with markets definable at the level of single instruments from the
    demand perspective, but wider on the basis of supply-side considerations.
47. The parties refer to the different activities included in the post-trading process as a
    single economic segment and do not discuss possible segmentations. Although this
    approach appears questionable, the market definition in this case can be left open as
    serious doubts as to the compatibility of the operation with the common market do not
    arise, regardless of the precise market definition adopted.
Geographic market
48. The parties propose a national market definition for the relevant post-trading services in
    this case on the basis that in order to carry out their activity, custodians and clearing
    members which act as agents for clearing and settlement have to become members of
    the national Central Securities Depository(ies) and, where relevant, also of the relevant
    Central Counterparties.
49. On the other side, however, they note that MiFID has liberalised the market for post-
    trading services allowing investment firms, market operators operating in MTFs and
    regulated markets to have access to clearing and settlement systems of other Member
    States. They also note that even non-EEA market operators do not face
    economic/regulatory barriers when trying to enter national post-trading markets.
50. In the Commission's view, analogous arguments apply as to the geographic scope of the
    market as already discussed above insofar as demand for these services in respect of the
    specific types of security at issue may presently be primarily national in scope, but
    market participants based in third countries are likely to require access to the same
    providers as do participants based in Italy.
51. In case M.3511 the market definition was left open. In this case the market definition
    can similarly be left open, as the proposed operation does not raise serious doubts as to
    its compatibility with the common market, regardless of the geographic scope of the
    market considered.
VI.      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
Horizontal overlaps – multilateral platforms for trading in financial instruments
52. Unicredit and Intesa Sanpaolo Group are active in the management of multilateral
    platforms for the trade of financial instruments only through TLX.
7 See Judgment of the Court of First Instance of 9 September 2009 in case T-301/04, Clearstream Banking
    AG and Clearstream International SA v. Commission
                                                        9

53. The table below illustrates, according to the Parties, TLX's current position and that of
    its main competitors as regards trading in Italian bonds on retail multilateral trading
    venues in 2008, both in terms of volumes traded and in terms of number of deals.
                  TLX and its competitors’ market shares – bonds segment
         (transactions taking place only on trading venues, excluding wholesale
                                    government bond trading)
                                                           2008
  Competitor             number of            Market share      Turn-over (€      Market
                         deals                                  bln)              shares
  TLX                          […]                [40-50]%           […]            [30-40]%
  Borsa Italiana
                               […]                [50-60]%           […]            [60-70]%
  (MOT)
  Hi-Mtf                       […]                 [0-5]%            […]              [0-5]%
  Total Market              5,464,808               100%             260               100%
    Source: notification, Commission calculations
54. As regards possible separate relevant markets for multilateral trading services in retail
    sized government bonds, corporate bonds and "branded" bonds, the market investigation
    has suggested market shares for TLX in the region of 35-50%.
55. There is no horizontal overlap or potential overlap between the Parents and the joint
    venture, and therefore no horizontal concerns arise.
56. The market data show a strengthening in the relative position of TLX vis-à-vis Borsa
    Italiana which is market leader on most segments. The market investigation confirmed
    this tendency but also that the operation was unlikely to lead to any impediment to
    competition.
57. According to the results of the market investigation, the effect on competition of the
    proposed operation can be considered, if anything, beneficial rather than detrimental.
58. In view of the above, it can be excluded that serious doubts arise as regards the
    compatibility of the operation with the common market in the field of management of
    multilateral platforms for trading Italian-issued debt securities in retail size.
                                                       10

Vertical effects
59. The market shares of the parent companies of Euro TLX SIM in the vertically related
    markets of trading in bonds on third party account in retail venues are illustrated in the
    tables below.
                        UNICREDIT AND INTESA SAN PAOLO MARKET SHARES
                             MARKET FOR TRADING ITALIAN BONDS -2008
                                (TRADING ON THIRD PARTY ACCOUNT)
                      (TRANSACTIONS THAT TAKE PLACE ON RETAIL TRADING
                                            VENUES)
                                          Volume (bln €)    Market shares
                          Unicredit           […]             [10-20]%
                       Intesa Sanpaolo        […]             [20-30]%
                     Unicredit + Intesa       […]             [40-50]%
                          Sanpaolo
                        Total market           260              100%
60. From these figures it appears that the Parties have a combined share of around [40-50]%
    in the overall relevant upstream market and a downstream share of around [20-40]%
    depending on how it is measured (number or value of trades).
61. The market investigation looked closely at the question of whether, as a result of the
    operation, there was any risk that the Parties would be able to leverage these market
    shares in either the upstream or downstream market in order to significantly reinforce
    their position in the other market resulting in a significant impediment to effective
    competition in that market. This risk was considered, however, by the vast majority of
    respondents to be negligible.
62. In addition to the relatively limited market shares and attendant probability that such a
    strategy would not be profitable, it was also confirmed, as suggested by the Parties, that
    the requirements of best execution to which they were subject under MiFID in addition
    to their commitment to "dynamic best execution" would require them to choose the
    execution venue best suited to the needs of each individual client, regardless of whether
    this was TLX or a competitor. It would therefore not be possible for them systematically
    to direct order flow to TLX if the conditions of trading offered at any given moment
    were not optimal for the needs of the client. Indeed, as business following the operation
    would be conducted at an arms-length basis and TLX would be remunerated by the
    parent companies on a […], its competitive advantage in respect of the order flow
    generated by its parents would arguably be weakened rather than strengthened as a
    result of the operation.
63. Similarly, wider access to TLX as an alternative to, in particular, Borsa Italiana would
    allow investment firms competing with the parents access to more competitive terms of
                                                    11

    trade than prior to the operation, suggesting that also competition in the upstream
    market would be strengthened rather than weakened.
64. As indicated, in the post-trading field the activities of TLX's parent companies do not
    overlap as only […].
65. On this basis it can be excluded that possible vertical concerns would lead to serious
    doubts as to the compatibility of the operation with the common market.
VII.    CONCLUSION
66. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
    139/2004.
                                                         For the Commission
                                                         (signed)
                                                         Neelie KROES
                                                         Member of the Commission
                                                  12
