                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                  Brussels, 22.09.2009
                                                                  SG-Greffe(2009) D/5582
                                                                  C(2009)7440
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
                                                                           PUBLIC VERSION
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
                                                                        MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                     ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                  To the notifying party
 Dear Sir/Madam,
 Subject:      Case No COMP/M. 5580 - BlackRock/ Barclays Global Investors UK Holdings
               Notification of 18 August 2009 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC)
               No 139/2004
 1. On 18 August 2009, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
     pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 1 ("EC Merger Regulation") by
     which the undertaking BlackRock, Inc. ("BlackRock", US) acquires within the meaning of
     Article 3(1)(b) of the EC Merger Regulation control of the whole of the undertaking Barclays
     Global Investors UK Holdings Limited, including its subsidiaries, ("BGI", UK) by way of
     purchase of shares.
 I.   THE PARTIES
 2. BlackRock is a U.S. publicly traded company active in the provision of global investment
     management, risk management and advisory services to institutional and retail clients around
     the world. BlackRock manages assets on behalf of institutional and individual investors
     worldwide through a variety of fixed income, cash management, equity and balanced and
     alternative investment separate accounts and funds. In addition, through BlackRock
     Solutions, the company offers risk management and advisory services that combine capital
     markets expertise with BlackRock's systems and technology.
 1       OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1.
 Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

3. BGI is a UK company and is owned by Barclays Bank plc. BGI is a global asset manager
    and provider of investment management products and services. BGI currently offers
    structured investment strategies such as indexing, global asset allocation and risk-controlled
    active products as well as related investment services such as securities lending, cash
    management and transition management services, primarily to institutional clients.
II.   THE CONCENTRATION
4. The proposed concentration concerns the acquisition by BlackRock of BGI from Barclays
    Bank plc by means of a Stock Purchase Agreement signed in June 16 2009 between
    BlackRock, Barclays plc and Barclays Bank plc, pursuant to which BlackRock intends to
    acquire 100% of the issued and outstanding equity interest in BGI from Barclays Bank plc.
    Barclays plc is the ultimate parent of Barclays Bank plc and of BGI 2 .
5. The transactions leads to the acquisition of sole control of BGI by BlackRock and therefore
    constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the EC Merger
    Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more than
    EUR 5 billion 3 (BlackRock: EUR 3,443 million, BGI EUR […] million). Each of them has a
    Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (BlackRock EUR […] million, BGI
    EUR […] million) and, they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
    Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation
    therefore has a Community dimension.
IV. RELEVANT PRODUCT AND GEOGRAPHIC MARKETS
7. The parties’ activities overlap in asset management, transition management services,
    securities lending and cash management.
 (1) Asset Management
8. Asset management concerns the provision of investment advice and often also the
    implementation of this advice with delegated powers from the client. To this end, a variety of
    investment products and asset classes, such as equity, fixed income, real estate, exchange
    traded funds and others, are used. These investment instruments cater for differing needs of
2   Also, pursuant to the Agreement, Barclays plc intends to acquire an aggregate of 37.8 million shares in
    BlackRock Common Stock, Series B Convertible Participating Preferred Stock and Series D Participating
    Preferred Stock, collectively representing approximately (and in no event greater than) a 4.9% voting interest
    and an aggregate 19.9% economic interest in BlackRock.
3   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation.
                                                         2

    investors with a distinct risk profile, management charges, yield/growth potentials,
    investment horizon and volume, liquidity (i.e. ease of trading large quantities without moving
    the price), transaction costs, transparency, amongst many other factors.
9. Asset management services therefore include the creation, establishment and marketing of
    retail pooled funds (mutual funds, unit trusts, investment trusts and open-ended investment
    companies) and the provision of portfolio management services to pension funds, institutions,
    international organisations and private investors. The Commission has left open the question
    whether the retail and institutional segments constitute separate product markets but has
    pointed out that asset management excluded the provision of portfolio management services
                                                      4
    to individuals (so-called private banking).
10. In more recent decisions, the Commission has also considered the possibility of further
    segmenting the asset management market, based upon the investment strategy, ie. active
    versus passive asset management 5 , 6 .
11. The notifying party takes the view that the relevant market is the asset management market as
    a whole, and that the narrower segments previously referred to (institutional vs retail, active
    vs passive) are not relevant for the competition analysis. In its view, a high degree of demand
    and supply-side substitution exists between the different types of asset management products.
12. On the demand side, BlackRock refers to the ease of switching by clients between different
    asset management products and services and also that there is a chain of substitution between
    investment products as each product is directly substitutable with several other investment
    products which have common features (e.g. transaction cost, risk profile, etc…). As regards
    supply side substitution, BlackRock argues that suppliers can easily switch or reposition from
    one type of investment product or strategy to another, given the very low barriers to entry,
    expansion and repositioning between the different types of products, referring to an
    increasing number of products that combine elements of "active" and "passive" strategies.
13. The market investigation undertaken in the present case does not wholly support the
    arguments put forward by BlackRock. In particular, as regards supply side substitutability,
    the majority of competitors refer to the difficulty of switching between active asset
    management to passive asset management, referring to factors such as differing skill sets,
    intellectual capital, investment processes, technology requirements and the importance of
    economies of scale in passive products, without which a competitive offering cannot be
    achieved. On the demand side, some customers also considered that it was difficult to shift
4   See for example, COMP M. 4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets; COMP/M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB; COMP/M.
    1453 AXA/GRE.
5   Case COMP/M. 5341 Allianz / Cominvest, December 18, 2008.
6   Active asset management consists of strategies in which the investment manager makes specific investments
    with the goal of outperforming a benchmark (e.g., an index), while passive asset management consists of
    strategies which merely seek to replicate the performance of an index (e.g., Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs)).
    Passive asset management services therefore normally have lower management fees than active asset
    management services.
                                                        3

    from an active manager to a passive manager, and vice versa. The question can, however, be
    left open since the concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
    common market on any of the alternative possible market definitions considered.
14. Asset management has previously been looked at on the basis of either a national or
                             7                                          8
    international/EEA scope . The market investigation in recent cases , as well as in the present
    case, has provided some support for the view of the notifying party that the market is wider
    than national, in particular for passive products, but it is not necessary to conclude on the
    exact scope of the geographic market as no serious doubts as to the compatibility of the
    proposed transaction with the Common Market arise under any alternative market definition.
 (2) Transition management services
15. Transition management services (TMS) are provided to clients wishing to transition their
    portfolio holdings from one investment manager to another. The Commission has not
    considered this market in its earlier decisions.
16. Although the Parties argued that TMS might be viewed as part of the broader asset
    management market, they recognized that due to regulatory constraints this activity was
    conducted separately from their asset management activities.
17. The market investigation suggested that these services should be distinguished from asset
    management as well as from investment brokerage because they are provided by asset
    managers, brokers, investment banks and custodian banks – therefore by a number players
    whose core focus is in markets other than asset management – and because they imply a
    program/project approach in addition to requiring trading skills and technology. The market
    investigation also showed that these services are provided sometimes on an agency/fiduciary
    basis, as they are by the Parties, and sometimes on a principal basis by entities other than
    asset management firms.
18. The market investigation therefore suggested that these services have a number of
    characteristics of a distinct relevant product market, without, however, allowing the
    Commission to conclude definitively in this regard.
19. The market investigation also suggested that some customers might have a preference for
    TMS provided on an agency basis, without however allowing the Commission to conclude
    that this typified any particular type of customer or transition scenario. On a conservative
    basis, the Commission nonetheless also considered a market limited to services provided on
    an agency basis.
20. In the present instance it is, however, not necessary to reach a definitive conclusion on the
    market definition in this area since, regardless of whether or not TMS are considered to
7   COMP/M. 3894, Unicredito/HVB; COMP/M.1453, AXA/GRE; IV/M.1043, BAT/Zurich.
8   COMP/ M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets
                                                  4

    constitute a distinct relevant product market, serious doubts as to the compatibility of the
    transaction with the common market do not arise.
21. The Parties submitted that the geographic market for transition management services was
    global or at least EEA-wide in scope, given that the Parties and their competitors provide
    these services on a global basis from a few centralized locations.
22. The market investigation did not allow the Commission, however, to exclude that transition
    management might constitute a national market owing to the importance of local presence,
    knowledge and contacts. However, the ability to provide services on a global basis was
    clearly of importance for certain clients.
23. In the present case it is not necessary to conclude as to the geographic scope of the relevant
    market since serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of the transaction with the
    common market in this area, regardless of the geographic scope considered.
(3) Securities Lending
24. According to the Parties, securities lending consists in the lending of securities, whereby the
    borrower borrows certain securities and provides the lender with collateral, in the form of
    cash, government securities or a letter of credit of a value equal to or greater than the lent
    securities. As payment for the loan, the Parties negotiate a fee, usually quoted as an
    annualized percentage of the value of the loaned securities. In a typical transaction, the
    Parties would lend securities to a securities borrower such as an investment bank.
25. The Commission has in prior cases considered whether securities lending is part of the asset
    management market or whether securities lending constitutes a separate market, however it
    has left the question open 9 .
26. The Parties also submit that the geographic market for securities lending services is global or
    at least EEA-wide in scope, given that the Parties can provide these services on a global basis
    from a few centralized locations.
27. There is no need to take a definitive position as to whether securities lending services
    constitute a separate market, nor on the geographic scope of such possible relevant market,
    given that, even assuming for argument's sake that securities lending was a separate relevant
    market, the proposed transaction does not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility
    with the Common Market, since the parties combined market share is significantly below
    15% at a worldwide, EEA, and Member State level.
(4) Cash Management
28. According to the notifying Party, both parties are also active in cash management, which
    refers to the management of money market funds, which can consist of pooled funds of a
9   Case COMP/M.3511, Wiener Boerse et al/Budapest Stock               Exchange/Budapest  Commodity
    Exchange/KELER/JV, Commission Decision of 22 March 2005, para 27.
                                                   5

    multitude of investors or separate accounts of large investors 10 . Money market funds pool
    money-market securities and allow investors to diversify risk among the various company
    securities in the fund. Money market securities refer to short-term money market and bond
    instruments issued by governments and financial companies, which have a weighted average
    life/maturity of one year or less, including negotiable certificates of deposit (CDs), bankers'
    acceptances, U.S. Treasury bills, commercial paper, municipal notes, federal funds and
    repurchase agreements (repos). Given that these debt instruments are very liquid and have a
    very short term maturity, they essentially amount to short term liquidity investments for a
    wide range of institutional and distributor investors and for securities lending cash collateral
    management.
29. There is no need to take a definitive position as to whether cash management services
    constitute a separate market, nor on the geographic scope of such possible relevant market,
    given that, even assuming for argument's sake that cash management was a separate relevant
    market, the proposed transaction does not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility
    with the Common Market, since the parties combined market share is significantly below
    15% at a worldwide, EEA, and Member State level.
V. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
30. The proposed concentration leads to overlaps of the Parties’ activities in respect of
    institutional asset management, active asset management and passive asset management at a
    worldwide level, in the EEA, and in a number of Member States. Affected markets arise only
    if the passive asset management segment is considered. Despite uncertainties in the market
    share calculations, the transaction also leads to probable affected market segments for
    transition management services at EEA level and/or in the UK, particularly if restricted to
    such services provided on an agency basis.
31. In the fields of securities lending and cash management, the combined market shares of the
    Parties at worldwide, EEA and Member State level are below 15% and the increment
    resulting from the transaction is limited 11 . Therefore, this market will not be further examined
    as serious doubts can be excluded on the basis of market share alone.
(1) Asset Management
32. Considering the overall asset management market, it can be concluded with confidence that
    the combined market shares provided by the parties and based on assets under management
    (AUM) in 2008, whilst uncertain, would be significantly below 15% at world-wide, EEA and
    Member State level.
10 Cash management in this sense is, of course, to be distinguished from cash handling (Case No COMP/M.5293,
    Banco Santander/Alliance & Leicester, para 16) as well as treasury management (Case No COMP/M. 3216,
    Oracle/PeopleSoft, footnote 22) and refers to the optimization of investment returns on liquid assets.
11  In securities lending BlackRock only has […] in the EEA, with […] of Assets on loan in and EEA market of
    […].
                                                          6

33. Should the asset management market be further segmented on the basis of the type of investor
    (i.e., into institutional and retail asset management), there would be overlaps on both the
    institutional and retail asset management segments.
34. Considering the institutional segment, it can again be concluded with confidence that the
    combined market shares provided by the parties and based on assets under management
    (AUM) in 2008, whilst uncertain, would be significantly below 15% at worldwide, EEA and
    Member State level.
35. In the retail segment, BGI is present only through iShares, its ETF brand, which is bought by
    retail investors through intermediaries. BGI is unable to estimate the proportion of these
    products which is actually held by retail as opposed to institutional investors (or investors
    based in the EEA as opposed to investors based elsewhere), but the figure of total AUM at
    end 2008 of […] represents in any event well below [10-20] % of the estimated EEA retail
    asset management market and would clearly be lower still if the institutional and non-EEA
    elements were excluded. BlackRock is exclusively active in the retail segment through
    mutual funds, whilst BGI only offers pooled funds to institutional investors. In the EEA,
    BlackRock's market share is below [0-5] %. The Parties' combined market share is therefore
    well below 15%.
36. In Case COMP/M. 5341 Allianz / Cominvest, the Commission considered the possibility of
    looking separately at active and passive funds within the retail segment but left this open12 . In
    the present case, if such a distinction were to be made there would be no overlap between the
    Parties, since BlackRock does not offer ETFs whilst BGI does not offer retail mutual funds,
    i.e. actively managed retail funds.
37. On the basis of investment strategy type used, overlaps between the activities of the Parties
    would result on both the active and passive asset management segments, although market
    shares would remain well below 15% for all possible geographic segmentations for active
    asset management.
38. The only possible segment where the parties would hold more than 15% combined market
    share is the passive asset management segment, considered at worldwide or EEA level or at
    the level of certain Member States. At worldwide level, market shares as calculated by the
    Parties may be slightly above [20-30] % 13 , but the overlap is limited as BlackRock only has a
    limited presence in passive asset management (around [0-5] %). This is explained by the
    notifying party by the fact that BlackRock has traditionally focused on actively managed
    products and has only a marginal presence in passive investment products, a fact which was
    confirmed in the market investigation. Furthermore, a number of important competitors are
    present in this segment at worldwide level, with players such as Legal & General, State
    Street, Vanguard, Société Générale, amongst others.
12  Case COMP/M. 5341 Allianz / Cominvest, December 18, 2008, recital 15.
13  Uncertainties about the market size do not allow this to be concluded with certainty.
                                                          7

39. In all other possible geographic areas for passive asset management, market shares would,
    according to the data supplied by the notifying Party, be below 25%, with BlackRock being
    only marginally present within the EEA, with AUM of […], representing less than [0-5] % of
    the market. Thus the parties would hold just [10-20] % at EEA level, and in two Member
    States (the UK and Sweden) market shares would rise slightly [20-30] %. In all markets, the
    parties would face a number of competitors including State Street, Legal and General,
    Vanguard, UBS, HSBC, Lyxor and Deutsche Bank.
40. A vertical relationship may exist between the asset management market and the market for
    provision of investment risk management systems, since BlackRock, through its BlackRock
    Solutions platform, offers risk management solutions (based primarily on the Aladdin
    investment and risk management platform) and financial advisory services. BGI does not
    offer any such services in the EEA or elsewhere in the world.
41. It can, however, be concluded that this relationship will not give rise to any anticompetitive
    effects. Firstly, the Aladdin platform is not product specific, i.e., it can be used for all types of
    asset management products (e.g., fixed income, equities, cash) and investment systems (e.g.,
    active and passive). Secondly, BlackRock's investment system and risk management solutions
    are primarily bought by institutional investors. 14 Thirdly, BlackRock estimates that its share
    in the provision of investment systems and risk management solutions is below [10-20] %
    both on a global and EEA basis (both in terms of revenues and AUM). Fourthly, BlackRock's
    presence in Europe is minimal (less than […]), as the vast majority of BlackRock's turnover
    from the sale of Aladdin investment system to third parties was realized […]. Finally, there a
    number of competing providers of investment systems (comparable to Aladdin) and risk
    management services that include Charles River, Murex, Latent-Zero, Calypso, Simcorp
    Dimension, Barra, Algorithmics, RiskMetrics, and Polypaths.
(2) Transition management services
42. In their initial submission, the Parties suggested that the combined firm would have a market
    share of between [5-10] % and [10-20] % on a worldwide basis and about [5-10] % on an
    EEA basis, with BGI contributing around three-quarters of the total. As a national market was
    not considered, no data relating to national markets were initially provided by the Parties. On
    this basis, the transaction was considered by the Parties not to lead to any affected markets.
43. During the market investigation, certain respondents raised specific concerns in this segment
    relating to potential dominance and pricing power of the combined firm post-merger. These
    concerns were raised in particular in relation to the UK.
44. The Commission therefore undertook extensive further fact-finding both vis-à-vis the Parties
    and by contacting well-placed sources within the industry in order to validate the Parties'
    figures and more generally determine the competitive situation on this market.
14  According to the notifying party, less than ten asset managers use BlackRock's Aladdin platform, one of which
    is BGI.
                                                          8

45. These inquiries suggested that the Parties were indeed significantly stronger, at least in the
    UK segment of the market, than their initial submission had suggested.
46. It was generally confirmed that there were a relatively large number of participants in this
    market – at least 15 – although there had been some consolidation in 2008 and 2009 with
    several players exiting the market. It was also confirmed that there were no reliable sources of
    third-party data. However, according to one source BGI was considered to be the number two
    player in the market with 15-20%, behind the market leader, State Street. Blackrock was
    considered a medium-sized player with around 10% of the market. A second source estimated
    somewhat lower figures, although only slightly lower if the market were to be restricted to
    TMS provided on an agency basis. It was also observed that a number of players, although
    present on the market, have limited market share.
47. The Parties themselves subsequently provided an estimate of their UK market share at [10-
    20] %, possibly rising to slightly over 15% if limited to agency TMS only. They provided
    estimates of a similar order of magnitude for Italy and the Netherlands. They further provided
    data on TMS tenders which showed that there were a number of competitors on such business
    throughout the period and that the Parties frequently did not compete on the same business.
48. All sources viewed the Parties as high-quality providers who might appeal particularly to
    certain fund managers who were concerned to transact business on an agency basis. However,
    it was suggested that this preference was more a personal matter than a characteristic of
    particular market segments, at least in Europe.
49. It was acknowledged that it was not difficult to start an activity in this area, but nonetheless a
    certain number of barriers to entry were recognized since access to clients required brand
    recognition and size was needed to achieve market share. Barriers to expansion were
    considered to be lower for entities that already had some business and an established brand.
    Despite exits and consolidation, there have also been signs of re-entry and expansion by
    existing providers.
50. It follows from the considerations above that, although the combined firm will be a very
    important player, and possibly the market leader, at least in the UK, its market share will
    remain in all likelihood below 30% – even if the market were limited to TMS provided on an
    agency basis – there are a number of qualified competitors and the market is contestable. On
    this basis, the Commission is able to conclude that serious doubts do not arise as to the
    compatibility of the transaction with the common market.
                                                  9

VI. CONCLUSION
51. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and
    to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This decision
    is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                       For the Commission
                                                       (signed)
                                                       Neelie KROES
                                                       Member of the Commission
                                                  10
