                       EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                       Competition DG
                       Markets and cases III: Financial services and Health-related markets
                                                                     Brussels, 19/08/2009
  In the published version of this decision, some                    SG-Greffe(2009) D/5014/ 5015
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article                   C(2009) 6557
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                             PUBLIC VERSION
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                       MERGER PROCEDURE
  general description.                                                  ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sirs,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.5568 - VOLKSWAGEN/ FLEET INVESTMENTS/
               LEASEPLAN CORPORATION JV
               Notification of 14 July 2009 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
               No 139/2004 1
I. INTRODUCTION
1.     On 14 July 2009, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by which the
       undertakings Volkswagen Bank GmbH ("Volkswagen Bank", Germany), belonging to
       the Volkswagen AG ("Volkswagen", Germany), and Fleet Investments BV
       ("Investments BV", the Netherlands), belonging to the Metzler Group, acquire, within
       the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation, joint control of the
       undertaking LeasePlan Corporation N.V. ("LeasePlan Corporation", the Netherlands)
       by way of purchase of shares.
II. THE PARTIES
2.     Volkswagen is active in the development, manufacture and sales of cars and light
       commercial vehicles including spare parts and accessories, vehicle distribution,
       financial services related to the distribution and financing of cars and commercial
       vehicles, fleet management solutions and R&D.
3.     Investments BV is an investment and holding company and part of the Metzler Group.
       The Metzler Group's activities are focussed on providing individual advice to
       corporate and institutional customers and high net worth private clients in five core
1    OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

      business areas: asset management, corporate finance, equities, financial markets and
      private banking.
4.    LeasePlan Corporation is active in full fleet leasing and management services for light
      vehicles, short term car rental, finance lease and insurance brokerage.
III. THE OPERATION
5.    97.9% of the issued and paid up share capital of LeasePlan Corporation is owned by
      Global Mobility Holding B.V. ("Global Mobility Holding"). 2 Shares in Global
      Mobility Holding are owned by Volkswagen Bank (50% of shares), MDC-LP Holding
      S.a.r.l. ("MDC Holding") (25% of shares) and by Crescent Beteiligungsverwaltung
      GmbH ("Crescent") (25% of shares).
6.    The acquisition of joint control by Volkswagen, MDC Holding and Crescent has been
      cleared by the Commission in the case M. 3090 Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/Lease
      Plan/JV. 3
7.    MDC Holding and Crescent intend to sell their shares in Global Mobility Holding
      B.V. to Volkswagen. Volkswagen will sell those shares to Investments BV. As
      Volkswagen’s designated transferee of the shares, Investments BV will accept transfer
      of the shares directly from the sellers.
Single operation
8.    The Parties submit that the above transactions constitute a single operation as the
      purchase of MDC Holding and Crescent's shares by Volkswagen will not result in
      structural change on a lasting basis because the above shares will be transferred
      directly to Investments BV. Therefore the first transaction will only result in a
      temporary change of control, which cannot be considered as a concentration in the
      light of ECMR. 4 Consequently, the operation to be analysed in the merger
      proceedings is the acquisition of joint control by Volkswagen and Investments BV
      over the LeasePlan Corporation.
Joint control
9.    Post transaction LeasePlan will be jointly controlled by Volkswagen and Investments
      BV due to the following reasons:
10.   Firstly, both Parties will have an equal number of shares in LeasePlan Corporation.
11.   Secondly, according to the JV's Agreement the Supervisory Board of LeasePlan
      Corporation will be composed of two directors appointed by Volkswagen and two
      directors appointed by Investments BV. The quorum required for the meetings of the
      Supervisory Board is at least one director appointed by Volkswagen and one director
      appointed by Investments BV.
2   The remaining 2,1 % of the shares are owned by Stichting Werknemersparticipatie LPC.
3   See: case M. 3090 Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/Lease Plan/JV.
4   See: para. 28 -35 of Commission Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice.
                                                        2

12.    The Supervisory Board shall decide by unanimity matters such as: appointment or
       dismissal of the CEO, annual budget and business plan. The Supervisory Board shall
       decide also, by 75% majority, the appointment of other Board Members. On the basis
       of the above it has to be concluded that post transaction Volkswagen and Investments
       BV will have each veto right as to strategic decisions of LeasePlan and therefore post
       – transaction Volkswagen and Investments BV will exercise joint-control over the JV.
13.    As a result of the above transaction, Global Mobility Holding’s subsidiary LeasePlan
       Corporation will be jointly controlled by Volkswagen and Investments BV within the
       meaning of Article 3(1)b of Council Regulation (EC) 139/2004.
IV.      COMMUNITY DIMENSION
14.    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
       than EUR 5 billion 5 (Volkswagen - EUR 113,808 million, 6 Investments Group - EUR
       […] million and LeasePlan Group - EUR 5,078 million). Each of the undertakings
       has a Community-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (Volkswagen EUR
       […] million, Investments Group – […] million and LeasePlan Group – […] million)
       but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide
       turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has
       a Community dimension.
V.       RELEVANT MARKETS
Full fleet leasing and management services
15.    The undertakings active on this market offer to their clients a combination of two
       services: (a) funding in form of operating leasing, and (b) outsourcing of the fleet and
       its management. 7 More specifically, fleet leasing comprises inter alia: services related
       to the funding of the vehicle fleet by (operating) leasing, advisory services in relation
       to the fleet structure and the choice of the vehicle to be acquired as well as services
       regarding acquisition of vehicles in the name and for the account of the leasing
       company as well as the services during life-time of the vehicle, such as administration,
       car registration, insurance, replacement car management, maintenance etc.
16.    In its previous decisions the Commission left open whether the market for full fleet
       leasing and management services could be further subdivided into funded and
       unfunded leasing. 8
17.    In the past the Commission defined the markets for full fleet leasing and management
       services as national in scope due to several factors, such as national specialities in tax
5   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p. 1).
6   Excluding Porsche.
7   See: case M. 3090 Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/Lease Plan/JV, para. 10
8   See: case M. 3090 Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/Lease Plan/JV, para. 10; and case M. 5250
    Porsche/Volkswagen, para. 36-37.
                                                        3

      and duty regimes, different road conditions, different levels of wear and tear leading
      to differing needs and preferences of the customers etc. 9
Finance lease for vehicles
18.   Finance lease for vehicles functions as a funding by the lessor to enable the lessee to
      purchase a vehicle and is available for the individual vehicles. Finance lease could be
      distinguished from the full fleet leasing as the leasing agreements for finance lease are
      concluded with the main purpose of financing the vehicles (as opposed to outsourcing
      fleet services in case of full fleet leasing). Financing the vehicles may be achieved in
      particular in a form of leasing in which the customer obtains ownership of the vehicle
      at the end or the vehicle will be immediately sold to a third person by the lessor.
19.   In its previous decisions the Commission described the market for finance lease as
      national in scope. 10
Short term car rental
20.   Short term car rental refers to provision of cars for an individually agreed duration.
      Such cars could be taken over by the user at certain locations (e.g. airports, railway
      stations). The Commission considered in its previous decisions that the short car rental
      is national at scope. 11
Insurance brokerage services (distribution of insurance products)
21.   Insurance brokerage services is a market of the distribution of insurance services in
      general, comprising distribution by direct writers, tied agents and intermediaries such
      as banks and brokers. 12 The market for insurance brokerage services could be further
      subdivided into life and non-life insurance as well as on the basis of the distribution
      chain or type of the product, however, the Commission decided to leave the exact
      market definition open.
22.   The Commission considered insurance brokerage services as national at scope. 13
Banking services
23.   In its previous decisions the Commission has held that banking services can be
      divided into three main segments: (i) retail banking, (ii) corporate banking and (iii)
      financial market services. 14
9   See: case M. 3090 Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/Lease Plan/JV, para. 11; and case M. 5250
    Porsche/Volkswagen, para. 48
10  See: case M. 3090 Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/Lease Plan/JV, para 13
11  See: Ibid.
12  See: case M. 1307 Marsch & McLennan/Segdwick
13  See: case M. 4284 Axa/Winterthur, para. 15, 19.
14  See: case M. 4844 Fortis/ABN Amro Assets.
                                                       4

24.    Retail banking generally comprises all banking services to private individuals and
       very small enterprises. In the retail banking the Commission distinguished the
       following product markets: personal current accounts, savings accounts, consumer
       loans, mortgages, distribution of mutual funds, and private banking services.
25.    Corporate banking comprises banking services to large corporate customers ("LCC’s")
       and smaller commercial clients such as small and medium-sized enterprises
       ("SME’s"). 15
26.    Financial market services comprise services such as trading (on an agent or riskless
       principal basis) in securities, bonds and derivatives as well as foreign exchange
       trading, money market operations (i.e. trading in treasury bills and commercial paper
       from banks and companies) and other asset classes. In previous cases, the Commission
       has left open the question whether each of these services constitute a separate product
       market. 16
27.    The Commission has in the previous decisions considered that, with regard to retail
       banking services and corporate banking services to SME's the relevant geographic
       market is national at scope. The Commission has furthermore left open whether the
       market for corporate banking to LCCs is national or wider at scope. As for the
       financial market services, the Commission has considered that most of the market
       segments are international at scope. 17
28.    In the present decision all the market definitions can be left open as the transaction
       does not lead to competition concerns under any alternative market definition.
VI.      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
29.    The transaction does not give rise to any vertical or horizontal overlaps between
       Investments BV and LeasePlan Corporation.
30.    Volkswagen and LeasePlan have overlapping activities in certain countries in full fleet
       leasing and management services, finance lease for vehicles, short term car rental and
       insurance brokerage. In addition, Volkswagen is active in the manufacturing and
       distribution of cars, which can be considered as a vertically related market to the full
       fleet leasing and management services, short term car rental and insurance brokerage.
31.    These existing overlaps give rise to several horizontally and vertically affected
       markets in a significant number of EEA Member States in respect of several product
       markets. However, these existing overlaps have been found not to raise competition
       concerns          in        previous         Commission            decisions:          M.3090
       Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/LeasePlan/JV and M.5250 Porsche/Volkswagen and the        18
       current operation does not change anything in relation to the existing overlaps.
15  See: Ibid.
16  See: Ibid.
17  See: case M. 5384 BNP Paribas/Fortis.
18  The only overlap which has not been addressed in M. 3090 decision was the de minimis overlap in the
    insurance brokerage, however both Parties do not have market shares exceeding 5% on any relevant
                                                      5

32.    Neither Investments BV nor any other companies in the Metzler Group are active in
       any markets in which LeasePlan is active or in a vertically related market to
       LeasePlan's activities.
33.    The transaction therefore does not give rise to any new relevant overlaps in the Parties'
       activities.
34.    The only new (minor) overlaps which the Parties identified as a result of the
       transaction are not relevant as they are minor horizontal overlaps between the Parents'
       activities that are unrelated to the joint venture's activities. However, they do not lead
       to any risk of coordination of the Parents' activities.
35.    The Metzler Group 19 and Volkswagen are active in financial services. However, the
       two parents have a different focus. Volkswagen offers corporate and retail banking
       services in Germany while the Metzler Group focuses on investment banking, asset
       management, financial market services and private banking in Germany and Ireland.
       The minor overlap between the parents' activities is not relevant for the assessment of
       the proposed transaction. In any event, the parties submit that the parents' combined
       market share on any possible relevant market in this sector would be well below 15%.
       On the other hand, none of the financial service activities of the Metzler Group could
       be considered as being upstream to LeasePlan's activities.
36.    To conclude, the proposed transaction does not give rise to any horizontally or
       vertically affected markets nor does it appear to result in a significant impediment to
       effective competition.
VII.     CONCLUSION
37. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
     Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                                For the Commission
                                                                (signed)
                                                                Algirdas Semeta
                                                                Member of the Commission
    national market (or segment thereof, particularly in motor vehicle insurance brokerage) with the exception
    of Austria and Czech Republic, where the combined market share is between 5-10%.
19  Metzler Group is controlling Investments BV.
                                                          6
