                        EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 3.12.2009
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2009) D/10938-10939
                                                                 C(2009) 9893
  In the published version of this decision, some
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article                      PUBLIC VERSION
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are                  MERGER PROCEDURE
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information                ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION IN
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                 CONJUNCTION WITH
  general description.                                                     ARTICLE 6(2)
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.5597 – Towers Perrin/ Watson Wyatt
                Notification of 14.10.2009 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 139/2004 1
1. On 14 October 2009, the European Commission ("the Commission") received a
      notification of a proposed concentration pursuant to Article 4, and following a referral
      pursuant to Article 4(5), of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the "Merger
      Regulation") by which the undertaking Towers, Perrin, Forster & Crosby, Inc., ("Towers
      Perrin", U.S.) enters into a full merger within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the
      Merger Regulation with Watson Wyatt Worldwide, Inc. ("Watson Wyatt", U.S.).
I.      THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
2. Watson Wyatt is a global consulting firm providing human capital and financial
      management consulting services, mainly focusing on retirement benefits, pensions
      administration, investment consulting, human capital services as well as insurance and
      financial services consulting in 34 countries, including Austria, Belgium, France,
      Germany, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the Netherlands, and the UK.
3. Towers Perrin provides human capital and financial management consulting services,
      mainly in the areas of retirement benefits, investment consulting, human capital
      consulting (including surveys), investment consulting, insurance and financial services
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

    consulting, and reinsurance broking services in 27 countries, including Belgium, France,
    Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, and the UK.
II.  CONCENTRATION
4. The concentration is a merger of equals of all activities of Watson Wyatt and Towers
    Perrin (together "the Parties") within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger
    Regulation.
III. EUROPEAN UNION DIMENSION
5. The operation does not have a European Union dimension within the meaning of Article
    1 of the Merger Regulation 2 . The proposed transaction does not meet the thresholds of
    Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation as the Parties' aggregate worldwide turnover is
    […], i.e. below EUR 2 500 million. The proposed transaction also does not meet the
    turnover thresholds of Article 1(3) of the Merger Regulation.
6. On 14 August 2009, the Commission received, by means of a reasoned submission, a
    referral request pursuant to Article 4(5) with respect to the transaction based on the
    consideration that the transaction would otherwise be subject to review under the
    national merger control regimes of Germany, the Netherlands, Spain and the UK. A
    copy of this submission was transmitted to the Member States on 17 August 2009.
7. The case fulfils the two conditions set out in Article 4(5) of the Merger Regulation,
    since (i) the transaction is a concentration within the meaning of Article 4(5) of the
    Merger Regulation, and (ii) the proposed concentration is capable of being reviewed
    under the national competition laws of at least three Member States.
8. As none of the Member States competent to review the transaction expressed their
    disagreement as regards the request to refer the case to the Commission, the transaction
    falls within the jurisdiction of the Commission pursuant to the Article 4 (5) referral
    request filed by the Parties.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
9. The Parties provide that they are active within human capital and financial management
    consulting services, mainly and more specifically in the areas of (a) retirement benefits
    and pension administration, (b) insurance and financial services consulting, (c)
    investment consulting and (d) human capital consulting, including surveys.
2   The terminology of the Regulation is here and elsewhere adapted following the entry into force on 1
    December 2009 of the Treaty of Lisbon amending the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty
    establishing the European Community.
                                                      2

A. RETIREMENT BENEFITS CONSULTING AND PENSIONS ADMINISTRATION
    1. Relevant product markets
10. The Parties recognized that retirement benefits consulting might constitute a separate
    product market, consisting of consulting and actuarial services to corporations, trustee
    bodies and other entities regarding retirement and health benefits for employees' pension
    funds. These services include inter alia: plan design and implementation, actuarial and
    financial valuations, retirement risk management, due diligence process, research,
    market surveys and benchmarking studies, pension fund management, compliance and
    administration of funds and other actuarial services.
11. The market investigation confirmed that retirement benefits consulting constitutes a
    separate product market due to the specific knowledge required to be active in this field.
12. The Parties also indicated that they were active in the area of pensions administration,
    which consists of facilities to allow scheme members to access their fund balances and
    to perform certain operations via for example websites. Taking into consideration that
    the Parties provide advice on retirement benefits, it was considered whether pensions
    administration might constitute a follow-on market to retirement benefits, provided
    largely or exclusively to clients of the latter.
13. The replies to the market investigation showed that retirement benefits consulting and
    pensions administration constitute separate markets, because different skills are required
    to perform these activities. For retirement benefits the main skill required is, as
    described above, specific knowledge in the area of pension funds, while, IT systems
    and IT knowledge play a vital role in the area of pensions administration. Also, the
    market investigation suggested that there might be different providers for these two
    services: consulting firms for retirement benefits with IT companies playing a much
    greater role in pensions administration.
    2. Relevant geographic markets
14. The Parties submit that the geographic market for retirement benefits consulting, just as
    several of the other markets where the Parties are active, has both national and
    international aspects, due to the frequent cross-border nature of the Parties business on
    the one hand and the need for local knowledge of national pension regulations on the
    other. Consequently, the Parties provided market share estimations on both levels –
    national and EEA-wide.
15. The market investigation confirmed that the geographic scope of retirement benefits
    consulting has both national and international characteristics. The national aspect, as
    suggested by the Parties, is linked to the knowledge of national pension systems
    required to operate on this market. However, the market investigation also indicated that
    the retirement benefits consulting market could have some aspects which are broader
    than national as large multinational companies purchasing these services would require
    a service offering covering a number of countries, in particular with regard to the need
    to reconcile pension accounting with a single underlying set of accounting standards.
                                                     3

16. The market investigation suggested that the geographic market for the pensions
    administration market could be more national in scope than retirement benefits
    consulting in view of the fact that pension administration systems depend on local
    regulatory frameworks and factors such as social security or tax rules.
17. For the assessment of the present transaction, the exact geographic market definition
    can, however, be left open as no serious doubts arise as to the compatibility of the
    notified transaction with the internal market on either market, irrespective of the
    geographic market definition adopted.
    3. Competitive Assessment
     Retirement benefits consulting
18. According to the data provided by the Parties, their combined market shares on the
    market of retirement benefits consulting would be below [30-40%] in all the affected
    markets on the assumption that such markets were national in scope, including in
    Belgium, Germany and the Netherlands, where the highest range of market shares has
    been estimated.
19. According to the market investigation, the Parties' combined market share in Belgium
    would be around [20-30%]and they would face important competitors such as AON,
    Mercer and Conac with market shares of around 10-30% each.
20. In Germany, the market investigation confirmed that the Parties' combined market share
    would be around [20-30%]post transaction. Mercer would remain the largest player with
    a market share above 30% and other competitors would be present on the market such as
    Hewitt with around [10-20%] market share.
21. In the Netherlands, the combined market share of the Parties would amount to [30-40%]
    with strong competitors such as Mercer, Hewitt and AON with market shares of around
    10-20% each.
22. In all other EEA Member States where the Parties' activities in retirement benefits
    consulting overlap, their combined market share is below [20-30%] and no concerns
    were raised during the market investigation.
23. On an EEA-wide basis, the Parties estimated their combined market shares in retirement
    benefits consulting as [20-30%]. The market investigation also confirmed the presence
    of a number of competitors active at the EEA level in retirement benefits consulting on a
    multi-jurisdictional basis, such as Hewitt, Mercer and the Big Four accounting firms
    (E&Y, KPMG, Deloitte, PWC) as well as Milliman (which entered the retirement
    benefits consulting segment in 2009).
24. Although the respondents pointed to high barriers to entry into the retirement benefits
    consulting market, due to the need for specialist knowledge and reputation as well as
    fulfilment of national regulatory and capital requirements, barriers to expansion for
    companies already active in this field were considered not to be significant, as the major
    requirement would only be the employment of additional specialist staff.
                                                 4

25. Therefore, on the basis of the above it can be concluded that the proposed transaction
    will not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in the
    area of retirement benefits consulting, regardless of the geographic scope of the market
    considered.
     Pensions administration
26. In the notification, the Parties indicated that affected markets would arise in the area of
    pensions administration only in two EEA Member States, namely in Belgium (combined
    market share estimated in the range of [10-30%], with an increment due to Towers
    Perrin of [0-5%]) and in Germany (combined market share [20-30%], with an increment
    due to Towers Perrin of around[5-10%]). On an EEA-wide market, the combined market
    share would remain below [10-20%].
27. None of the respondents to the market investigation in Belgium or Germany raised
    competition concerns as regards the position of the Parties in the pensions
    administration. A number of competitors are active in these countries in pensions
    administration field, such as Conac, Hewitt and Mercer in Belgium and Deutsche Post,
    Mercer and Hewitt in Germany with market shares of around 5-35% in the respective
    national markets.
28. Therefore, on the basis of the above it can be concluded that the transaction will not give
    rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in the area of
    pensions administration.
B. INSURANCE CONSULTING AND ACTUARIAL SOFTWARE
1.      Relevant product markets
    General description of insurance consulting
29. The Parties initially proposed a definition of "insurance and financial services
    consulting" (hereafter "insurance consulting") to include the provision of consulting
    services to insurance and financial service institutions such as advice on market entry,
    distribution strategy, financial and risk management, financial and risk modelling,
    financial reporting and performance management, compliance and statutory reporting,
    advice on premium rating and product design, insurance valuation, claims reserving,
    M&A advisory, and supply of supporting actuarial and risk management software.
30. Within this area of the Parties' business, the possibility of a further distinction was
    recognized between: (i) life insurance consulting; and (ii) non-life insurance consulting.
31. The market investigation carried out by the Commission indicated that "insurance
    consulting", as engaged in by the Parties, essentially consists in consulting on financial
    matters specific to the insurance industry and is founded on the actuarial skill-set in
    addition to specific industry experience. It is to be distinguished, therefore, from other
    types of consulting service which may be provided to the insurance industry (including
    the reinsurance sector for the purposes of this Decision) but in which the specific
    features of that industry, namely the management of non-financial risk, do not play a
                                                    5

    major role, for example IT systems consulting, HR consulting and so on 3 . The latter set
    of activities would fall within the domain of other general or specialized consultancies
    whose sectoral focus would normally be wider than the insurance industry. In relation to
    certain matters this boundary is nonetheless loosely drawn, in particular as regards sign-
    off of actuarial value, capital management and business strategy where the Parties are
    active with particular industry skills but providers of general consulting services may
    also play a role in serving insurance clients.
32. The Commission has not previously defined these markets. In cases involving the Big
    Four accounting and consulting firms, the Commission has observed that markets had
    both national and international characteristics but without considering possible narrower
    product market definitions and without concluding on geographic scope of the markets
    concerned 4 .
33. With respect to insurance consulting, it is relevant to note that the Commission has
    consistently determined that insurance markets themselves were mostly national in
    scope, with the exception of some classes of large corporate non-life risk and
    reinsurance. 5 In previous cases relating to insurance markets, the Commission has
    distinguished between life and non-life insurance and, within both categories, further
    subdivided the market, in life insurance between protection, pension and investment
    products and within non-life insurance between different categories of risk. The
    relevance of a distinction between life and non-life insurance was also reflected in the
    market investigation for the consulting market as further set out below. Further
    subdivisions of the consulting market by type of insurance were, however, considered in
    the context of this case by market participants not to be relevant for the purposes of
    market definition.
34. The market investigation has shown that the conditions of competition are appreciably
    different in the various segments of insurance consulting and accordingly that there is a
    need to define the relevant product markets more narrowly than initially proposed by the
    Parties, distinguishing in particular between (a) financial valuation and capital adequacy
    consulting, (b) general insurance consulting, with a possible distinction within this
    segment between life and non-life consulting and (c) actuarial software for life insurance
    companies 6 .
      (a) Financial valuation and capital adequacy consulting for insurance companies
3   Non-financial risk is understood as all risk arising outside of financial markets against which insurance
    can be written.
4   See e.g.: case COMP/M.2810 Deloitte & Touche / Andersen (UK), Commission Decision of 1 July 2002,
    paragraph 30.
5   See e.g.: case COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV, Commission Decision of 17 June 2008,
    paragraphs 25 and 42.
6   In the field of actuarial software for non-life insurance the Parties' activities do not presently overlap in
    the EEA.
                                                           6

35. Financial valuation and capital adequacy consulting includes activities such as (i)
    embedded value analysis in the context of financial reporting and (ii) related M&A
    advice, as well as (iii) financial modelling and valuation advice for the insurance
    industry, the latter having acquired greater prominence in connection with the proposed
    Solvency II Directive 7 .
36. This set of services may perhaps constitute a single relevant product market as they are
    provided by the Parties and their competitors on a homogenous basis across a number of
    jurisdictions. However, any further breakdown of this category between these three
    types of service may be left open in the framework of the present Decision, since,
    independently of such a further breakdown, serious doubts do not arise as to the
    compatibility of the notified transaction with the internal market in respect of these
    services.
      (b) General insurance consulting (life and non-life)
37. General insurance consulting consists of all other insurance consulting services than
    those set out in the previous section, the conditions of competition in relation to which
    are, as the underlying insurance markets themselves, national in scope. Examples of
    such services are the implementation of new financial modelling systems, statutory
    valuations, profit reporting, review of economic capital requirements, risk management
    consulting, asset and liability modelling, benchmarking and competitors analysis,
    stochastic financial modelling, product development and pricing, including research and
    analysis of regulatory compliance and selling practices and appointed actuary work.
38. The market investigation also indicated that within this segment of the market, separate
    markets should be identified for life insurance consulting services and non-life insurance
    consulting services despite the fact that the Parties are present in both. These branches
    require distinct specialist technical and market knowledge and may therefore constitute
    separate product markets. The market investigation suggested, however, that a further
    breakdown of the non-life consulting market by class of risk would be artificial as such
    a degree of specialization is in general not present or required in the consulting market.
39. However, for the purposes of the present Decision the possible further segmentation
    between life and non-life insurance consulting services can be left open since,
    irrespective of such a further breakdown, serious doubts do not arise as to the
    compatibility of the notified transaction with the internal market.
      (c) Actuarial software for life insurance
40. This market includes the supply of actuarial software for life insurance to insurance
    companies.
7   COM(2008) 119 final of 26 February 2008; Position of the European Parliament adopted at first reading
    on 22 April 2009.
                                                     7

41. Both Parties sell software for actuarial calculations for life insurance. The Parties'
    products, MoSes (Towers Perrin) and VIPitech (Watson Wyatt), are financial modelling
    software solutions which enable the user to build and run financial models of life
    insurance business. Both systems enable the user to project cash flows and regulatory
    capital requirements into the future for single policies or many policies. Their respective
    software is designed to enable the creation of complex actuarial models for life insurers
    and supports calculations and projects required for regulatory reporting purposes, asset
    liability, risk and capital management, product development and pricing, including
    modelling for the purpose of embedded value calculations, M&A transactions, Solvency
    II and other regulatory capital requirements. In addition to the respective software
    system, each party sells a number of code libraries and applications which are necessary
    to use the software. The code libraries take into account minimum capital requirements,
    tax regulations and other EEA-wide or country-specific regulatory requirements.
42. The Parties, as well as its main competitor in the EEA, Sungard, have also developed
    and are starting to market new versions of their software which enable its use on an
    enterprise level (i.e. accessible throughout the organization) and not merely as a desktop
    solution.
43. The market investigation indicated that there exists a separate market for actuarial
    software for life insurance. Although the MoSes platform could theoretically be used for
    non-life insurance, it is designed for life insurance and the available applications are
    limited to this segment. Towers Perrin also does not market MoSes as a non-life
    product. In addition, the fact that the Parties sell other actuarial software solutions for
    non-life insurance and other competitors also have dedicated software for non-life
    insurances (such as Igloo by EMB) shows that actuarial software for life and non-life
    insurance are separate markets.
2.      Relevant geographic markets
      (a) Financial valuation and capital adequacy consulting
44. The market investigation has indicated that services such as embedded value and M&A
    advice for the insurance industry are provided on an EEA or worldwide basis, while
    financial modelling and valuation advice in connection to Solvency II is provided on an
    EEA-wide basis as this Directive is applicable within the EEA.
45. Whilst these activities tend to be built on top of the national footprint that providers
    already have, they are distinct in nature and a permanent establishment in the
    jurisdiction of the client is not indispensable; it may also be possible to associate local
    resources with a project where there is a need to do so by working on a contract basis.
    The players active in this field, which include the Parties, almost all have a significant
    international presence.
46. It can therefore be concluded that there is a market for financial valuation and capital
    adequacy services for the insurance industry which is at least EEA-wide in scope.
    However, there is no need to conclude on the exact geographic scope of this market
                                                   8

    since, regardless of the geographic scope considered, serious doubts do not arise as to
    the compatibility of the notified transaction with the internal market.
(b) General insurance consulting
47. The market investigation has shown that both life and non-life general insurance
    consulting services are provided on a basis which is national in scope. Such services
    cater to needs related to the national insurance market and are provided by both
    multinational consulting firms such as the Parties as well as players whose geographic
    scope of activity is more limited, typically to the jurisdiction in question.
(c) Actuarial software for life insurance
48. The Parties argue that the market for financial modelling software is worldwide. They
    state that in previous cases 8 the Commission has identified software markets the
    geographic scope of which was worldwide on the basis that customers would consider
    vendors from all parts of the world and that there are no technological barriers that
    restrict vendors from responding to bids from all over the world. The Parties further
    submit that the software can be developed anywhere and that most market players
    operate on an international basis, transport cost in the software industry are immaterial,
    there are no language barriers and that local technical or sales support presence is not
    necessary.
49. The market investigation has not confirmed the arguments of the Parties but has instead
    shown that the relevant geographic market for actuarial software for life insurance is
    EEA-wide. While the base for the software is the same in various regions, different
    regulatory requirements and different business environments call for country or region
    specific code-libraries and applications. Therefore there is a need to provide software
    and support which is tailored to regional reporting requirements, the applicable EU
    norms, 9 and the national context in which insurance is written and claims arise.
50. The precedents the Parties refer to in order to establish a worldwide market cannot be
    relied upon for the purposes of the present case since they relate to software packages
    which are considerably more generic in nature or in respect of which, at least, market
    conditions have converged to international standards.
51. A worldwide market can, in the present case, be excluded on the basis that the
    conditions of competition are appreciably and demonstrably significantly different
    outside the EEA. For example, Milliman, which is the market leader for actuarial
8   See e.g.: case COMP/M.3216 Oracle/People Soft, Commission Decision of 26 October 2004 paragraph
    176, case COMP/M.4609 Siemens/UGS Corporation of 29 March 2007 paragraphs 12 and 19, and case
    COMP/M.5080 Oracle/BEA of 29 April 2008.
9   Notably Directive 2002/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 November 2002
    concerning life assurance as well as the upcoming Solvency II Directive.
                                                         9

    software for life insurance in the US, has yet to achieve sales to insurers based in
    Europe, even though it is present on the European insurance consulting market.
    Similarly, GGY with its software Axis has a significant market position in Canada, but
    only minor sales in the US and is not active in the EEA at all. This shows that vendors
    are not responding to bids from all over the world and/or are not necessarily operating
    on an international basis.
52. Narrower markets than the EEA can be excluded since according to the Parties'
    submissions, the Parties' respective software is supplied on a consistent pricing basis in
    an identical form within the EEA. Moreover numerous parameters of the insurance
    business are harmonized by EU Directives, giving rise to a relatively homogenous
    business environment for insurance within the EEA and therefore lower costs to adapt to
    national specificities within the EEA than with respect to other jurisdictions.
3. Competitive Assessment
      (a) Financial valuation and capital adequacy consulting
53. The market investigation has indicated that both Parties are currently significant players
    within this market in the EEA. Reliable estimates of their combined market share are,
    however, difficult to obtain. According to the Parties, they may represent up to [40-
    50%] of the segments of embedded value and M&A, whereas in relation to Solvency II
    implementation they would represent no more than [20-30%]. According to some
    competitors, combined market shares might be even higher than this on some segments,
    although other competitors equally estimated similar or even slightly lower figures to
    those of the Parties. In some instances, competitors' estimates of the strength of the
    Parties referred to a national market perspective and may be considered to reflect certain
    conjunctural factors specific to the country in question, in particular to recent M&A
    activity involving undertakings based in that country.
54. A significant part of the value created in these market segments appears to be linked to
    life insurance consulting, which requires projections of financial value over a much
    longer time horizon, and in respect of which the Parties are comparatively in a stronger
    market position than in respect of non-life consulting. The Parties achieve a significant
    proportion of their turnover from this type of activity, although they are also strongly
    positioned in a number of national general insurance consulting markets.
55. Next to the Parties, the main players in this market are the Big Four accounting, audit
    and consulting firms (i.e. PWC, Deloitte, Ernst & Young and KPMG) plus the
    specialized insurance consultancy Milliman and, for Solvency II only, EMB (which is
    specialized in non-life consulting). Certain players with a more national footprint do,
    nonetheless, also compete successfully in this field such as, for instance, Triple A Risk
    Finance in the Netherlands. Looking at the sample of those 20 European insurance
    companies which have formed an association for the development of standards for
                                                  10

      stating embedded value, 10 clearly shows that also the Big Four accounting firms have a
      significant presence in this field.
  56. Whilst embedded value analysis is a recurring need of insurance firms, M&A activity is
      more cyclical. The challenges linked to Solvency II implementation make this segment
      into a growing one in which all of the relevant players are keen to position themselves.
  57. Notwithstanding the high combined market shares calculated on a pro-forma basis, the
      market investigation has provided a significant amount of evidence to suggest that the
      actual market share of the combined company in respect of these services is likely to be
      lower than a simple addition of market shares suggests. This is primarily because there
      are low barriers to expansion for any of the qualified and established market players
      listed above which are already active on the market. In addition, it seems likely that the
      Big Four are well positioned to continue to gain market shares in this field, as it is
      related to accounting and auditing (even if there is no formal requirement to audit
      insurance accounts based on embedded value) and they are not impeded by conflict of
      interest rules (such as under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the US) from offering this
      service to their audit clients.
  58. It can therefore be concluded that serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of
      the notified transaction with the internal market in respect of the EEA market for
      financial valuation and capital adequacy consulting services to insurance companies.
(b) General insurance consulting
       General life insurance consulting
  59. According to the Parties, although reliable estimates for national life insurance
      consulting markets were difficult to obtain, the combined market shares of the Parties
      might exceed 30% and could represent up to [30-40%] in Ireland, [30-40%] in the
      Netherlands, [40-50%] in Sweden, and [40-50%] in the UK.
  60. The information gathered in the course of the market investigation made it possible to
      establish more precise figures for the market share data estimated for competitors by the
      Parties. The results of the investigation indicate that the proposed transaction would
      result in markets where the Parties' combined market shares would exceed 30% only in
      the following markets: the UK ([40-50%]) and the Netherlands ([30-40%]). In Sweden,
      Towers Perrin has […] and the increment to the market share of Watson Wyatt is
      marginal.
  61. In the UK, despite the relatively high combined market share of the Parties ([40-50]%),
      the Big Four accounting firms are also present on the market with market shares in the
      range of 5-20% each. A few other players (players with a national footprint as well as
  10  CFO Forum: http://www.cfoforum.nl/. Out of 20 companies Towers Perrin serves 5 insurers, Watson
      Wyatt 2 insurers, E&Y 1 insurer, Deloitte 1 insurer, PwC 5 insurers, KPMG 3 insurers and Milliman 1
      insurer. The remaining two insurers do not publish their embedded value analyst or does not require such
      analysis.
                                                           11

    Milliman, a company with cross-jurisdictional presence) account for 10-15% of the
    remaining market.
62. In the Netherlands, two of the Big Four accounting firms are present on the market with
    market shares in the range of 15-20% each. A strong local player, Triple A Risk
    Finance, as well as Milliman entered in 2006 and gained market shares in the range of 5-
    10% each. A number of other players (two out of the Big Four accounting firms together
    with companies with a more national footprint) account for the remaining of the market.
63. Furthermore, the market investigation indicates that the only important barriers to
    expansion for life insurance consulting are related to the need to recruit sufficiently
    qualified staff, in particular for senior management positions, the related know-how,
    building local reputation and brand awareness and having access to specialised actuarial
    software.
64. The established actuarial consulting firms can therefore expand their activities in
    response to any market opportunity that may arise as a result of the merger by hiring
    additional qualified staff. Several respondents in the market investigation did indeed
    indicate that the merger might in fact create additional business opportunities for
    existing players. The market data also suggest that greenfield entry by established
    consultants and academics into general insurance consulting is possible and does occur.
    In relation to some indications during the market investigation that the installed base of
    software might raise barriers to expansion for competitors, it is unnecessary to arrive at
    a definitive view since the divestiture by the Parties of one of the actuarial software
    packages for life insurance proposed as a commitment in the current case in response to
    concerns in the software market, on which see further below, can be expected
    significantly to reduce any degree of dependency which might arise in the related
    markets for consulting services.
65. In the view of the above, serious doubts as to the compatibility of the notified
    transaction with the internal market can therefore be excluded in the segment of general
    life insurance consulting in all affected national markets.
      General non-life insurance consulting
66. For general non-life insurance consulting, the Parties have estimated that their combined
    market share may exceed 30% and could amount to up to [30-40%] in Ireland and [30-
    40%] in the Netherlands. The verification of the market data in the market investigation
    however indicates the combined market shares of the Parties would exceed 30% in the
    Netherlands ( [30-40%]) and in Spain ([30-40%]).
67. In the Netherlands, three out of the Big Four accounting firms have market shares in the
    range of 5-15% each, and at least six other companies have markets shares of in some
    cases up to 15%.
68. In Spain, where the Parties combined market share is slightly above [30-40%], the
    market shares of Deloitte and a strong local company, Ideas, can be estimated to be
    above 20% in both cases; a large number of other companies with a more national
    footprint are also present.
                                                   12

69. The market investigation therefore confirms that a sufficient number of competitors
    remain in all of the above markets to constitute competitive constraints on the merged
    entity.
70. The market investigation indicates that the major barriers to expansion for non-life
    insurance consulting are essentially the same as for life insurance consulting which were
    discussed above, namely the need for access to qualified staff and related issues around
    know-how and reputation. The role of software in this regard can be disregarded since in
    any case the Parties are not particularly strong and their existing activities do not
    overlap in respect to non-life software.
71. In the view of the above, serious doubts as to the compatibility of the notified
    transaction with the internal market can therefore be excluded in the segment of general
    non-life insurance consulting in all affected national markets.
(c) Actuarial software for life insurance
72. The fact of the Parties' overlap in actuarial software for life insurance came to light
    during the market investigation when several respondents raised concerns as to the
    impact of the merger in this regard.
73. Towers Perrin is active in this field with its MoSes / Risk Agility software, whilst
    Watson Wyatt has a comparable and competing product called VIPitech.
74. Regarding the market for actuarial software for life insurance in the EEA, the presence
    of other competitors is limited. The only significant competitor active in the EEA is
    Sungard, an IT company whose software solution "Prophet" is, next to MoSes, the
    leading software package in the EEA.
75. The Parties estimated during the procedure that market shares for 2008 were as follows:
    Towers Perrin (MoSes) around [30-40%], Watson Wyatt (VIPitech) [5-10%], Sungard
    (Prophet) [30-40%], Milliman (ALFA) [10-20%], OAC (Mo.Net) [0-5%] and others at
    [0-5%].
76. While the relative size of Towers Perrin, Watson Wyatt and Sungard was roughly
    confirmed by the market investigation, the investigation showed that Milliman is not yet
    active in this market in the EEA (having no turnover at all in 2008) and can only be
    considered a potential entrant. On this basis the transaction would lead to reduction from
    3 to 2 players in the market, with an estimated combined market share of the merged
    entity in the area of [50-60%].
77. Under paragraph 68 of the Horizontal Guidelines, for entry to be considered a sufficient
    competitive constraint on the merging Parties, it must be shown to be likely, timely and
    sufficient to deter or defeat any potential anti-competitive effects of the merger. In the
    case of Milliman, which has already been providing consulting services in the EEA for a
    number of years and is established in multiple EEA jurisdictions, the fact of having
    failed so far to establish a significant presence in the software market is evidence that
    the standard of likely, timely and sufficient entry is not met.
78. In addition, the bidding data submitted by the Parties shows that the Parties' products
    closely compete for system replacements and add-ons (e.g. modules for Solvency II); in
                                                   13

    all bids submitted by VIPitech recently for new installations or replacements MoSes (as
    well as Sungard) were considered to be competitors. The market investigation also
    showed that OAC's software Mo.Net (in addition to having only marginal sales) is seen
    as less sophisticated and has fewer and narrower applications. The market investigation
    confirmed that it is not closely competing with the Parties' software.
79. The market investigation has confirmed significant barriers to entry into the market of
    actuarial and risk management software for life insurance. The most important barriers
    to entry are actuarial and regulatory know-how as well as development costs. The
    Parties estimated the cost of development of each of their products at about EUR[…]
    while other competitors estimated the cost at EUR 50-60 million over a longer period of
    time, i.e. including development of upgrades, further applications, etc.
80. Although the market investigation indicated that there were a very limited number of
    examples of very large insurance companies developing actuarial software in-house on
    the basis of generic enterprise software, the cost of development was generally
    considered far higher than the cost of buying in and adapting one of the Parties'
    products, such that the vast majority of insurance companies would have no incentive to
    rely on an insourcing solution. In addition, the core actuarial software market is
    relatively mature in the sense that there are few new customers, and switching from one
    software platform to another one is costly.
81. It can therefore be concluded that the merger would lead to the elimination of an
    important competitor and the number of actual suppliers in the EEA market would be
    reduced from three to two.
82. On this basis, it can be concluded that the transaction as notified would give rise to
    serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in respect of the EEA
    market for actuarial and risk management software for life insurance.
83. However, as indicated below, the Parties have made use of their right under Article 6(2)
    of the ECMR to submit modifications to the concentration in order to remove the serious
    doubts identified by the Commission.
C. INVESTMENT CONSULTING
1.      Relevant product market
84. The Parties submitted that investment consulting consists in providing investment
    strategy advice based on risk assessment, strategic asset allocation and investment
    manager selection. The Parties provide these services typically to pension funds.
85. For the purposes of the present Decision, it is unnecessary to conclude on whether or not
    this constitutes a distinct relevant product market and, if so, on the exact scope and
    definition of such a market, since even on the narrowest possible product market
    definition of investment consulting services provided to pension funds, the notified
    transaction does not lead to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
    market.
2.      Relevant geographic market
                                                  14

86. The Commission has recognised in the past that the markets for provision of
    management consultancy services have both national and international aspects. 11 The
    relevant geographic market for the investment consulting services provided by the
    Parties might be considered to be national due to the different regulatory framework in
    different countries. On the other hand, to serve large multinationals, it might be
    necessary to be established in a number of jurisdictions and offer services across those
    jurisdictions, in which case purely national players might be unable to compete for this
    class of business.
87. Consequently, in the notification, the Parties provided market data on an EEA-wide
    basis as well as on the narrowest possible geographic market, i.e. on a national basis.
88. For the purpose of this Decision it is not necessary to decide on the exact geographic
    market definition as regards the relevant investment consulting market as the notified
    transaction does not lead to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
    market, regardless of the geographic market considered.
3.      Competition assessment
89. According to the Parties, in investment consulting, the following possible markets would be
    affected by the transaction: in the EEA, the Parties would achieve a combined market share
    of [20-30%]with Towers Perrin contributing an increment of [0-5%];within national
    markets, the transaction would lead to market shares above 15% only in Germany
    (combined [10-20%], Towers Perrin [5-10%]), the Netherlands (combined [20-30%],
    Towers Perrin [5-10%]) and the UK (combined [20-30%], Towers Perrin [0-5%]).
90. In addition to the relatively modest market shares and small increment due to the merger, it
    should be noted that none of the respondents to the market investigation raised concerns in
    relation to the Parties' position in investment consulting post-transaction.
91. On the basis of the above, serious doubts may be excluded as to the compatibility of the
    notified transaction with the internal market within possible EEA or national markets for
    investment consulting.
D. HUMAN CAPITAL CONSULTING SERVICES
1.      Relevant product market
92. According to the Parties, human capital services include advice to clients in relation to,
    among other things, executive compensation, rewards, sales effectiveness and base pay
    arrangements. Within this activity, the Parties assist clients with talent management and
    the implementation of HR strategies to align a company's workforce with its business
    strategies in order to attract, retain and motivate employees and conduct surveys in this
    respect.
11  See e.g.: case COMP/M.1016 Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand, Commission Decision of 20 May
    1998 paragraphs 55-68 and case COMP/M.2810 Deloitte & Touche/Andersen (UK), Commission
    Decision of 1 July 2002 paragraphs 28-30.
                                                     15

93. The main activities of the Parties within human capital services relate to executive
    compensation advice, i.e. advice related to pensions, contract and severance terms and
    M&A/IPO advice as well as advice in regard to strategic rewards, i.e. compensation and
    benefits programme design, improving the effectiveness of sales and base pay
    arrangements.
94. For the purposes of the present Decision, it is unnecessary to conclude on whether or not
    this set of services constitutes a distinct relevant product market and, if so, on the exact
    scope and definition of such a market, since even on the narrowest possible product
    market definition the notified transaction does not lead to serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market.
2.       Relevant geographic market
95. The Commission has recognised in the past that the markets for provision of
    management consultancy services have both national and international aspects. 12 The
    relevant geographic market for the human capital consulting services provided by the
    Parties might be considered to be national due to the different regulatory framework in
    different countries. On the other hand, to serve large multinationals, it might be
    necessary to be established in a number of jurisdictions and offer services across those
    jurisdictions, in which case purely national players might be unable to compete for this
    class of business.
96. Consequently, in the notification, the Parties provided market data on an EEA-wide
    basis as well as on the narrowest possible geographic market, i.e. on a national basis.
97. For the purpose of this Decision it is not necessary to decide on the exact geographic
    market definition as regards the relevant human capital consulting market as the notified
    transaction does not lead to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
    market, regardless of the geographic market considered.
3.       Competition assessment
98. According to the Parties, in the field of human capital consulting services, the
    transaction will lead to combined market shares of around [10-20]% in the EEA, with an
    increment due to Watson Wyatt of around [0-5]%. The following possible national
    markets would be affected by the transaction: Belgium (combined [10-20] %, Watson
    Wyatt [5-10] %) and the UK (combined [10-20] %, Watson Wyatt [0-5] %) 13 .
99. In addition to the relatively modest market shares and small increment due to the merger, it
    may be noted that none of the respondents to the market investigation raised concerns in
    relation to the Parties' position in human capital consulting post-transaction.
12  See e.g.: case COMP/M.1016 Price Waterhouse/Coopers & Lybrand Commission Decision of 20 May
    1998 paragraphs 55-68 and case COMP/M.2810 Deloitte & Touche/Andersen (UK) Commission Decision
    of 1 July 2002 paragraphs 28-30.
13  The market shares do not include the turnover resulting from surveys, where Watson Wyatt's turnover is
    minimal.
                                                        16

100. On the basis of the above, serious doubts may be excluded as to the compatibility of the
   notified transaction with the internal market within possible EEA or national markets for
   human capital consulting.
V.   COMMITMENTS RECEIVED FROM THE NOTIFYING PARTIES
101. In order to render the concentration compatible with the internal market, the Parties
   have modified the notified concentration by entering into certain commitments, the final
   form of which is annexed to this Decision and forms an integral part thereof.
102. On 12 November 2009, the Parties submitted commitments to remedy the serious
   doubts which the Commission had provisionally identified in the market for actuarial
   software for life insurance.
103. According to the initial commitments, the Parties would divest, at their option, either
   Towers Perrin's life insurance software business ("MoSes Business") or Watson Wyatt's
   life insurance software business ("VIPitech Business"). The business to be divested
   would comprise respectively: the MoSes or VIPitech assets including the source codes
   of the respective software products, all the relevant trademarks and documented know-
   how including manuals for users, implementation and maintenance and all license and
   support agreements as well as key personnel dedicated to the MoSes or VIPitech
   respective business (including personnel devoted to product management, training,
   product support and sales). The commitments also foresaw the possibility of transitional
   service agreements for a period […]during which the Parties would, at the option of the
   Purchaser, provide general corporate support services to the divested business.
104. In addition, the Parties entered into related commitments, as foreseen under the
   Commission's remedies notice 14 , inter alia regarding the separation of the divested
   businesses from their retained businesses ("ring fencing"), the preservation of the
   viability, marketability and competitiveness of the divested businesses, including the
   appointment of a monitoring trustee and, if necessary, a divestiture trustee.
105. The Parties also expressed the intention to remain free to use the know-how related
   to the divested business and that they would keep this know-how confidential. Also, the
   Parties expressed their intention to enter into an agency agreement with the Purchaser as
   a result of which they would be able to market products of the divested business on
   behalf of the Purchaser.
VI. ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPOSED REMEDIES
     Market test
14 OJ C267 of 22 October 2008, p.1.
                                                  17

106. Without prejudice to the acceptability or otherwise of the alternative divestment
   solution initially proposed by the Parties, the Commission market-tested the
   commitments which the Parties had submitted on 12 November 2009.
107. The proposed commitments generally received a positive evaluation from
   competitors, both consultancy firms and software companies, and customers during the
   market test. The market test confirmed that the divestiture of one of the Parties' software
   business was acceptable and that under certain circumstances both businesses would be
   considered viable businesses. An interest in acquiring either of the businesses was
   expressed by a number of companies which are active in the provision of insurance
   consultancy services and/or related software.
108. Despite the overall positive responses some respondents to the market test were
   critical of a number of elements in the commitment offer. In particular, the market test
   indicated that the MoSes Business, as presented in the initial offer of commitments, was
   lacking an important element, i.e. the newly developed software platform called Risk
   Agility which was described by some respondents as being the "enterprise version" of
   MoSes. Overall, the Moses Business was therefore considered less attractive than the
   VIPitech Business which includes the VIPitech enterprise version, with a number of
   respondents being of the view that MoSes without RiskAgility would not be attractive to
   potential purchasers.
109. Secondly, respondents to the market test criticised the terms initially used by the
   Parties in relation to a "retention" of IP rights in relation to the divested software
   business. The concerns related to the right of the Parties to use all documented know-
   how of the divested business after the completion of the divestment; in particular, the
   respondents were concerned that the merged entity might use the know-how in the
   future development of the software which they retained.
110. Respondents to the market test also criticised the possibility that the Parties could
   enter into an agency agreement with the purchaser of the divested business allowing
   them to continue to market the divested software system. In addition, the proposed
   duration of […]for the transitional service agreements was considered too short. Some
   market participants also pointed out that at the option of the Purchaser, sufficient sales
   and support personnel should be made available to a purchaser and were of the view that
   the commitments offer was not sufficiently clear in this respect.
    Improvements to the commitments
111. Following the results of the market test, the Parties improved the commitments in
   several respects:
            - The Parties dropped the alternative remedy structure and committed to divest
                the VIPitech Business. This business includes also the enterprise version
                which is due for release in […].
            - Regarding the use of know-how the Parties clarified that this covers the use
                of knowledge about the VIPitech Business which employees acquired when
                working with this software. As the knowledge cannot be erased, the Parties
                                                 18

               were of the view that it could not be avoided that individuals use this
               knowledge. The commitments were improved to make clear that all
               documented know-how will be divested to the Purchaser. The know-how
               includes, but is not limited to, manuals, implementation know-how,
               maintenance know-how and training know-how.
           - Regarding the possibility of an agency agreement, the Parties clarified that
               the commitments were not conditional on the Purchaser entering into an
               agency agreement, but that the agency agreement would be at the option of
               the Purchaser and that the agency agreement would be non-exclusive.
               Depending on the strategy of the Purchaser, the Commission considers that
               this option should not be excluded as it might contribute to the
               competitiveness of the divested business in the event that the Purchaser were
               to benefit from additional marketing efforts and licensing income.
           - The Parties also clarified that all key personnel will be transferred and that
               this covers all VIPitech Business functions, including development, support,
               product management, training and sales and distribution.
           - The duration for transitional service agreements was extended to […]at the
               option of the Purchaser.
112. The commitments will address the competition concerns identified in the present
   decision. The commitments entered into by the Parties fully eliminate the horizontal
   overlap in the market for actuarial software for life insurance in the EEA and are
   therefore sufficient to eliminate the serious doubts as to the compatibility of the
   transaction with the internal market.
113. The commitments in section B, paragraphs 1 through 3 of the Annex constitute
   conditions attached to this decision, as only through full compliance therewith can the
   structural changes in the relevant markets be achieved. The other commitments set out
   in the Annex constitute obligations, as they concern the implementing steps which are
   necessary to achieve the modifications sought in a manner compatible with the internal
   market.
                                                19

VII. CONCLUSION
114. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
   operation as modified by the commitments and to declare it compatible with the internal
   market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement, subject to full compliance with
   the conditions in section B, paragraphs 1 through 3 of the commitments annexed to the
   present decision and with the obligations contained in the other sections of the said
   commitments. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) in conjunction
   with Article 6(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004.
                                                   For the Commission
                                                   (signed)
                                                   Neelie KROES
                                                   Member of the Commission
                                               20

                            Case M. 5597 – Towers Perrin/ Watson Wyatt
                         COMMITMENTS TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION
Pursuant to Article 6(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 4064/89 as amended (the “Merger
Regulation”), Towers, Perrin, Forster & Crosby Inc. (“Towers Perrin”) and Watson Wyatt
Worldwide, Inc. (“Watson Wyatt”) hereby provide the following Commitments (the “Commitments”)
in order to enable the European Commission (the “Commission”) to declare the Notified
Concentration compatible with the common market and the EEA Agreement by its decision pursuant
to Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation (the “Decision”).
These Commitments are provided without prejudice to the Parties’ position that the Notified
Concentration does not impede effective competition in the common market or in a substantial part
thereof and is therefore compatible with the common market and the functioning of the EEA
Agreement.
The Commitments shall take effect upon the date of adoption of the Decision.
This text shall be interpreted in the light of the Decision to the extent that the Commitments are
attached as conditions and obligations, in the general framework of Community law, in particular in
light of the Merger Regulation, and by reference to the Commission Notice on remedies acceptable
under Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and under Commission Regulation (EC) No 447/98.
Section A. Definitions
For the purpose of the Commitments, the following terms shall have the following meaning:
Affiliated Undertakings: undertakings controlled by Towers Perrin and/or Watson Wyatt (as the
case may be) or following completion of the Notified Concentration by Towers Watson, whereby the
notion of control shall be interpreted pursuant to Article 3 Merger Regulation and in the light of the
Commission Notice on the concept of concentration under Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
Closing: the transfer of the legal title of the Divestment Business to the Purchaser.
Divestment Business: the VIPitech-business as defined in Section B and the Schedule, being the
business of Watson Wyatt relating specifically to the development, marketing, licensing, upgrading,
and/or provision of customer support services (including maintenance) for the actuarial software
VIPitech and any standard applications developed in relation thereto, that the Parties commit to
divest, but excluding those sales and marketing activities associated with a broader range of client
responsibilities carried out by Watson Wyatt employees falling outside those listed in Group 1 of the
Schedule.
Divestiture Trustee: one or more natural or legal person(s), independent from the Parties, who is
approved by the Commission and appointed by Towers Watson and who has received from Towers
Watson the exclusive Trustee Mandate to sell the Divestment Business to a Purchaser at no
minimum price.
Effective Date: the date of adoption of the Decision.
First Divestiture Period: the period of […] from the date of implementation of the Notified
Concentration.
                                                       21

Hold Separate Manager: the person appointed by Watson Wyatt for the Divestment Business to
manage the day-to-day business under the supervision of the Monitoring Trustee.
Key Personnel: all personnel necessary to maintain the viability and competitiveness of the
Divestment Business, as listed in Group 1 of the Schedule.
Monitoring Trustee: one or more natural or legal person(s), independent from the Parties, who is
approved by the Commission and appointed by Watson Wyatt and Towers Perrin, and who has the
duty to monitor the Parties’ compliance with the conditions and obligations attached to the Decision.
Notified Concentration: the proposed merger between Towers Perrin and Watson Wyatt to form a
new publicly listed company called Towers Watson which was notified to the Commission on 14
October 2009 (Case M.5597).
Parties: Towers Perrin and Watson Wyatt, together with Towers Watson following completion of the
Notified Concentration.
Personnel: all personnel currently employed by the Divestment Business, including Key Personnel,
staff seconded to the Divestment Business, share personnel and the additional personnel listed in
Group 2 of the Schedule.
Purchaser: the entity approved by the Commission as acquirer of the Divestment Business in
accordance with the criteria set out in Section D.
Towers Watson: the company jointly formed by Towers Perrin and Watson Wyatt and which will
become the holding company controlling Towers Perrin and Watson Wyatt following completion of
the Notified Concentration. Towers Perrin and Watson Wyatt shall ensure that the obligations which
they have undertaken pursuant to these Commitments are also made binding on Towers Watson.
Trustee(s): the Monitoring Trustee and the Divestiture Trustee.
Trustee Divestiture Period: the period of […] from the end of the First Divestiture Period.
VIPitech Business: the business of Watson Wyatt specifically relating to the development,
marketing, licensing, upgrading, and/or provision of customer support services (including
maintenance) for the actuarial software VIPitech and any standard applications developed in relation
thereto, but excluding those sales and marketing activities associated with a broader range of client
responsibilities carried out by Watson Wyatt employees falling outside those listed in Group 1 of the
Schedule.
Section B. The Divestment Business
         Commitment to divest
1         In order to restore effective competition, the Parties commit to divest, or procure the
          divestiture of the Divestment Business by the end of the Trustee Divestiture Period as a
          going concern to a purchaser and on terms of sale approved by the Commission in
          accordance with the procedure described in paragraph 16. This divestment will guarantee
          effective competition on an ongoing basis. To carry out the divestiture, the Parties commit
          to find a purchaser and to enter into a final binding sale and purchase agreement for the
          sale of the Divestment Business within the First Divestment Period. If neither Watson
          Wyatt or Towers Watson has entered into such an agreement at the end of the First
          Divestiture Period, Towers Watson shall grant the Divestiture Trustee an exclusive
                                                     22

    mandate to sell the Divestment Business in accordance with the procedure described in
    paragraph 25 in the Trustee Divestiture Period.
2   The Parties shall be deemed to have complied with this commitment if, by the end of the
    Trustee Divestiture Period, a final binding sale and purchase agreement has been entered
    into, if the Commission approves the Purchaser and the terms in accordance with the
    procedure described in paragraph 16, and if the closing of the sale of the Divestment
    Business takes place within a period not exceeding […] after the approval of the purchaser
    and the terms of sale by the Commission.
3   In order to maintain the structural effect of the Commitments, the Parties shall, for a period
    of […] after the Effective Date, not acquire direct or indirect influence over the whole or
    part of the Divestment Business, unless the Commission has previously determined that
    the structure of the market has changed to such an extent that the absence of influence
    over the Divestment Business is no longer necessary to render the proposed
    concentration compatible with the common market.
  Structure and definition of the Divestment Business
4   The Divestment Business consists of the elements described in the Schedule to these
    Commitments. The present legal and functional structure of the Divestment Business as
    operated to date is described in the Schedule. The Parties intend to enter into an agency
    agreement with the Purchaser of the Divestment Business pursuant to which the Parties
    would be authorised to market VIPitech Systems (including corresponding VIPitech
    Standard Applications and software interfaces developed in connection with the VIPitech
    System) as an agent on behalf of the Purchaser.
5   For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby confirmed that:
   (a)       These Commitments are not conditional on the Purchaser entering into an agency
             agreement with the parties in respect of VIPitech Systems;
   (b)       Insofar as the Purchaser decides to enter into an agency agreement with the
             Parties in respect of VIPitech Systems, such an agreement shall be non-exclusive;
             and
   (c)       the Purchaser must – as part of the Purchaser Requirements demonstrate the
             intention, resources and capabilities to market and distribute the VIPitech software
             independently from the Parties.
6   The Divestment Business, described in more detail in the Schedule, includes:
       a. all tangible and intangible assets (including intellectual property rights), which
            contribute to the current operation or are necessary to ensure the viability and
            competitiveness of the Divestment Business.
       b. insofar as relevant all licences, permits and authorisations issued by any
            governmental organisation for the benefit of the Divestment Business;
       c.   all contracts, leases, commitments and customer orders of the Divestment
            Business; all customer, credit and other records of the Divestment Business (items
            referred to under (a) - (c) hereinafter collectively referred to as “Assets”);
       d. the Key Personnel listed in Group 1 of the Schedule. As regards other Personnel
            described in Group 2 of the Schedule, Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson
                                                   23

               undertakes to take all reasonable steps and to offer all reasonable assistance in
               procuring the transfer of these individuals to the Divestment Business in the event
               that the Purchaser wishes to employ, at its option, any of these individuals after
               Closing; and
           e. at the option of the Purchaser, for a transitional period of up to twelve months after
               Closing and on commercial terms to be negotiated at arm’s length the provision of
               support to the Divestment Business, as explained in the Schedule.
           f.  without prejudice to the foregoing,
                     i. Watson Wyatt or Towers Watson, as the case may be, remain free to
                        continue to use all of their and their employees’ knowledge about the
                        Divestment Business as described in the Schedule including, in particular,
                        all knowledge about the VIPitech know-how; and
                    ii. Watson Wyatt or Towers Watson may enter into a non exclusive licence
                        agreement with the Purchaser to allow either or all of the Parties and/or
                        their Affiliated Undertakings to use for the purpose of providing consultancy
                        services, the actuarial software VIPitech and any applications relating
                        thereto whose ownership has been transferred to the Purchaser. The
                        financial terms of the software licence agreement will be negotiated at arm’s
                        length with the Purchaser. The licence agreement shall, at the option of
                        Watson Wyatt or Towers Watson, as the case may be, include all future
                        improvements, updates and new releases of the VIPitech software effected
                        by the Purchaser and any application relating thereto.
Section C. Related commitments
       Preservation of Viability, Marketability and Competitiveness
7       From the Effective Date until Closing, Watson Wyatt and Towers Watson shall preserve
        the economic viability, marketability and competitiveness of the Divestment Business, in
        accordance with good business practice, and shall minimise as far as possible any risk of
        loss of competitive potential of the Divestment Business. In particular, Watson Wyatt and
        Towers Watson undertake:
        (a)       not to carry out any act upon its own authority that might have a significant
                  adverse impact on the value, management or competitiveness of the Divestment
                  Business or that might alter the nature and scope of activity, or the industrial or
                  commercial strategy or the investment policy of the Divestment Business;
        (b)       to make available sufficient resources for the development of the Divestment
                  Business, on the basis and continuation of the existing business plans;
        (c)       to take all reasonable steps, including appropriate incentive schemes (based on
                  industry practice), to encourage all Key Personnel to remain with the Divestment
                  Business.
                                                     24

    Hold-separate obligations of Parties
8   The Parties commit, from the Effective Date until Closing, to keep the Divestment Business
    separate from the businesses they are retaining and to ensure that the Key Personnel -
    including the Hold Separate Manager - have no involvement in any business retained and
    vice versa. Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson shall also ensure that the Key Personnel
    and the Personnel, insofar as carrying out functions relating to the Divestment Business,
    do not report to any individual outside of the Divestment Business. For the avoidance of
    doubt, this Commitment does not prohibit, subject to the oversight of the Monitoring
    Trustee, interactions between the Divestment Business and Watson Wyatt (and vice
    versa) which are necessary in order to sustain more general corporate and financial
    governance standards, and HR support to the Divestment Business (including to the usual
    HR processes relating to pay, benefits and rewards, adherence to Watson Wyatt quality
    standards, and the provision of legal support).
9   Until Closing, Watson Wyatt and Towers Watson shall assist the Monitoring Trustee in
    ensuring that the Divestment Business is managed as a distinct and saleable entity
    separate from the businesses retained by the Parties. For the avoidance of doubt, the
    Divestment Business is currently not operated as a distinct legal entity. It is operated as a
    business unit of Watson Wyatt Limited. Watson Wyatt and Towers Watson undertake
    pursuant to these Commitments to operate the Divestment Business as a distinct and
    saleable business unit separate from the businesses retained by the Parties. Watson
    Wyatt shall appoint a Hold Separate Manager who shall be responsible for the
    management of the Divestment Business, under the supervision of the Monitoring Trustee.
    The Hold Separate Manager shall manage the Divestment Business independently and in
    the best interest of the business with a view to ensuring its continued economic viability,
    marketability and competitiveness and its independence from the businesses retained by
    the Parties.
   Ring-fencing
10  The Parties shall implement all necessary measures to ensure that they do not, after the
    Effective Date, obtain access to any business secrets, know-how, commercial information,
    or any other information of a confidential or proprietary nature relating to the Divestment
    Business. The foregoing is without prejudice to the right of the Parties to obtain information
    relating to the Divestment Business insofar as the disclosure of that information is
    reasonably necessary for the divestiture of the Divestment Business or is required by law.
    For the avoidance of doubt, this Commitment does not prohibit interactions, subject to the
    oversight of the Monitoring Trustee, between the Parties and the Divestment Business
    (and vice versa) which are necessary in order to enable the Divestment Business or the
    Parties (as the case may be) to respond to a request for proposal / commercial terms from
    a prospective client which is seeking to procure the VIPitech actuarial software together
    with a range of consultancy services.
   Non-solicitation clause
11  The Parties undertake, subject to customary limitations, not to solicit, and to procure that
    Affiliated Undertakings do not solicit, the Key Personnel transferred with the Divestment
    Business for a period of […] after Closing.
                                                25

        Due Diligence
12      In order to enable potential purchasers to carry out a reasonable due diligence of the
        Divestment Business, Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson shall, subject to customary
        confidentiality assurances and dependent on the stage of the divestiture process:
        (a)        provide to potential purchasers sufficient information as regards the Divestment
                   Business;
        (b)        provide to potential purchasers sufficient information relating to the Personnel
                   and allow them reasonable access to the Personnel.
        Reporting
13      Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson shall submit written reports in English on potential
        purchasers of the Divestment Business and developments in the negotiations with such
        potential purchasers to the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee no later than 10 days
        after the date of every month following the Effective Date (or otherwise at the
        Commission’s request).
14      Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson shall inform the Commission and the Monitoring
        Trustee on the preparation of the data room documentation and the due diligence
        procedure and shall submit a copy of an information memorandum to the Commission and
        the Monitoring Trustee before sending the memorandum out to potential purchasers.
Section D. The Purchaser
15      In order to ensure the immediate restoration of effective competition, the Purchaser, in
        order to be approved by the Commission, must:
        (a)        be independent of and unconnected to the Parties;
        (b)        have the financial resources, proven expertise and incentive to maintain and
                   develop the Divestment Business as a viable and active competitive force in
                   competition with the Parties and other competitors;
        (c)        neither be likely to create, in the light of the information available to the
                   Commission, prima facie competition concerns nor give rise to a risk that the
                   implementation of the Commitments will be delayed, and must, in particular,
                   reasonably be expected to obtain all necessary approvals from the relevant
                   regulatory authorities for the acquisition of the Divestment Business (the before-
                   mentioned criteria for the purchaser hereafter the “Purchaser Requirements”).
16      The final binding sale and purchase agreement shall be conditional on the Commission’s
        approval. When Watson Wyatt or Towers Watson, as the case may be, has reached an
        agreement with a purchaser, it shall submit a fully documented and reasoned proposal,
        including a copy of the final agreement(s), to the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee.
        Watson Wyatt or Towers Watson must be able to demonstrate to the Commission that the
        purchaser meets the Purchaser Requirements and that the Divestment Business is being
        sold in a manner consistent with the Commitments. For the approval, the Commission
        shall verify that the purchaser fulfils the Purchaser Requirements and that the Divestment
                                                      26

         Business is being sold in a manner consistent with the Commitments. The Commission
         may approve the sale of the Divestment Business without one or more Assets or parts of
         the Personnel, if this does not affect the viability and competitiveness of the Divestment
         Business after the sale, taking account of the proposed purchaser.
Section E.      Trustee
         I.     Appointment Procedure
17       Watson Wyatt and Towers Perrin shall appoint a Monitoring Trustee to carry out the
         function specified in the Commitments for a Monitoring Trustee. If Watson Wyatt or Towers
         Watson has not entered into a binding sales and purchase agreement […] before the end
         of the First Divestiture Period or if the Commission has rejected a purchaser proposed by
         Watson Wyatt or Towers Watson at that time or thereafter, Towers Watson shall appoint a
         Divestiture Trustee to carry out the functions specified in the Commitments for a
         Divestiture Trustee. The appointment of the Divestiture Trustee shall take effect upon the
         commencement of the Extended Divestment Period.
18       The Trustee shall be independent of the Parties, possess the necessary qualifications to
         carry out its mandate, for example as an investment bank or consultant or auditor, and
         shall neither have nor become exposed to a conflict of interest. The trustee shall be
         remunerated by the parties in a way that does not impede the independent and effective
         fulfilment of its mandate. In particular, where the remuneration package of a Divestiture
         Trustee includes a success premium linked to the final sale value of the Divestment
         Business, the fee shall also be linked to a divestiture within the Trustee Divestiture Period.
         Proposal by the Parties
19       No later than one week after the Effective Date, Watson Wyatt and Towers Perrin shall
         submit a list of one or more persons whom Watson Wyatt and Towers Perrin proposes to
         appoint as the Monitoring Trustee to the Commission for approval. No later than […]
         before the end of the First Divestiture Period, Towers Watson shall submit a list of one or
         more persons whom Towers Watson proposes to appoint as Divestiture Trustee to the
         Commission for approval. The proposal shall contain sufficient information for the
         Commission to verify that the proposed trustee fulfils the requirements set out in paragraph
         18, and shall include:
         (a)        the full terms of the proposed mandate, which shall include all provisions
                    necessary to enable the Trustee to fulfil its duties under these Commitments;
         (b)        the outline of a work plan which describes how the Trustee intends to carry out
                    its assigned tasks;
         (c)        an indication whether the proposed Trustee is to act as both Monitoring Trustee
                    and Divestiture Trustee or whether different trustees are proposed for the two
                    functions.
         Approval or rejection by the Commission
20       The Commission shall have the discretion to approve or reject the proposed Trustee(s)
         and to approve the proposed mandate subject to any modifications it deems necessary for
         the Trustee to fulfil its obligations. If only one name is approved, Watson Wyatt, Towers
                                                        27

   Perrin, and/or Watson Towers (as the case may be) shall appoint or cause to be
   appointed, the individual or institution concerned as Trustee, in accordance with the
   mandate approved by the Commission. If more than one name is approved, Watson
   Wyatt, Towers Perrin, and/or Watson Towers (as the case may be) shall be free to choose
   the Trustee to be appointed from among the names approved. The Trustee shall be
   appointed within one week of the Commission’s approval, in accordance with the mandate
   approved by the Commission.
    New proposal by the Parties
21 If all the proposed Trustees are rejected, Watson Wyatt, Towers Perrin, and/or Watson
   Towers (as the case may be) shall submit the names of at least two more individuals or
   institutions within one week of being informed of the rejection, in accordance with the
   requirements and the procedure set out in paragraphs 17 and 20.
    Trustee nominated by the Commission
22 If all further proposed Trustees are rejected by the Commission, the Commission shall
   nominate a Trustee, whom Watson Wyatt, Towers Perrin, and/or Watson Towers (as the
   case may be) shall appoint, or cause to be appointed, in accordance with a trustee
   mandate approved by the Commission.
   II.     Functions of the Trustee
23 The trustee shall assume its specified duties in order to ensure compliance with the
   Commitments. The Commission may, on its own initiative or at the request of the Trustee
   or Watson Wyatt, Towers Perrin, and/or Watson Towers (as the case may be), give any
   orders or instructions to the Trustee in order to ensure compliance with the conditions and
   obligations attached to the Decision.
    Duties and obligations of the Monitoring Trustee
24 The Monitoring Trustee shall:
               (i)      propose in its first report to the Commission a detailed work plan
                        describing how it intends to monitor compliance with the obligations
                        and conditions attached to the Decision.
               (ii)     oversee the on-going management of the Divestment Business with a
                        view to ensuring its continued economic viability, marketability and
                        competitiveness and monitor compliance by the Parties with the
                        conditions and obligations attached to the Decision. To that end the
                        Monitoring Trustee shall:
                        (a)       monitor the preservation of the economic viability,
                                  marketability and competitiveness of the Divestment
                                  Business, and the keeping separate of the Divestment
                                  Business from the business retained by the Parties, in
                                  accordance with paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Commitments;
                        (b)       supervise the management of the Divestment Business as a
                                  distinct and saleable entity, in accordance with paragraph 9
                                  of the Commitments;
                        (c)       (i) in consultation with the Parties, determine all necessary
                                  measures to ensure that the Parties do not after the effective
                                                28

                  date obtain any business secrets, know-how, commercial
                  information, or any other information of a confidential or
                  proprietary nature relating to the Divestment Business and (ii)
                  decide whether such information may be disclosed to any of
                  the Parties as the disclosure is reasonably necessary to
                  allow Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson to carry out the
                  divestiture or as the disclosure is required by law;
      (d)         monitor the splitting of assets and the allocation of Personnel
                  between the Divestment Business and Towers Watson or
                  Affiliated Undertakings;
(iii) assume the other functions assigned to the Monitoring Trustee under
      the conditions and obligations attached to the Decision;
(iv)  propose to the Parties such measures as the Monitoring Trustee
      considers necessary to ensure the Parties’ compliance with the
      conditions and obligations attached to the Decision, in particular the
      maintenance of the full economic viability, marketability or
      competitiveness of the Divestment Business, the holding separate of
      the Divestment Business and the non-disclosure of competitively
      sensitive information;
(v)   review and assess potential purchasers as well as the progress of the
      divestiture process and verify that, dependent on the stage of the
      divestiture process, (a) potential purchasers receive sufficient
      information relating to the Divestment Business and the Personnel in
      particular by reviewing, if available, the data room documentation, the
      information memorandum and the due diligence process, and (b)
      potential purchasers are granted reasonable access to the Personnel;
(vi)  provide to the Commission, sending to each of the Parties a non-
      confidential copy at the same time, a written report within 15 days after
      the date of every month. The report shall over the operation and
      management of the Divestment Business so that the Commission can
      assess whether the business is held in a manner consistent with the
      Commitments and the progress of the divestiture process as well as
      potential purchasers. In addition to these reports, the Monitoring
      Trustee shall promptly report in writing to the Commission, sending
      each of the Parties a non-confidential copy at the same time, if it
      concludes on reasonable grounds that either of the Parties is / are
      failing to comply with these Commitments;
(vii) within one week after receipt of the documented proposal referred to in
      paragraph 15, submit to the Commission a reasoned opinion as to the
      sustainability and independence of the proposed purchaser and the
      viability of the Divestment Business after the Sale and as to whether
      the Divestment Business is sold in a manner consistent with the
      conditions and obligations attached to the Decision, in particular, if
      relevant, whether the Sale of the Divestment Business without one or
      more Assets or not all of the Personnel affects the viability of the
                                 29

                        Divestment Business after the sale, taking into account of the proposed
                        purchaser.
    Duties and obligations of the Divestiture Trustee
25 Within the Trustee Divestiture Period, the Divestiture Trustee shall sell at no minimum
   price the Divestment Business to a purchaser, provided that the Commission has
   approved both the purchaser and the final binding sale and purchase agreement in
   accordance with the procedure laid down in paragraph 16. The Divestiture Trustee shall
   include in the sale and purchase agreement such terms and conditions as it considers
   appropriate for an expedient sale in the Trustee Divestiture Period. In particular, the
   Divestiture Trustee may include in the sale and purchase agreement such customary
   representations and warranties and indemnities as are reasonably required to affect the
   sale. The Divestiture Trustee shall protect the legitimate financial interests of Watson
   Wyatt and/or Towers Watson, subject to the Parties’ unconditional obligation to divest at
   no minimum price in the Trustee Divestiture Period.
26 In the Trustee Divestiture Period (or otherwise at the Commission’s request), the
   Divestiture Trustee shall provide the Commission with a comprehensive monthly report
   written in English on the progress of the divestiture process. Such reports shall be
   submitted within 15 days after the end of every month with a simultaneous copy to the
   Monitoring Trustee and a non-confidential copy to the Parties.
   III.   Duties and obligations of the Parties
27 The Parties shall provide and shall cause its advisors to provide the Trustee with all such
   co-operation, assistance and information as the Trustee may reasonably require to
   perform its tasks. The Trustee shall have full and complete access to any of Watson
   Wyatt’s or the Divestment Business’ books, records, documents, management or other
   personnel, facilities, sites and technical information necessary for fulfilling its duties under
   the Commitments and Watson Wyatt and the Divestment Business shall provide the
   Trustee upon request with copies of any document. Watson Wyatt and the Divestment
   Business shall make available to the Trustee one or more offices on their premises and
   shall be available for meetings in order to provide the Trustee with all information
   necessary for the performance of its tasks.
28 Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson shall provide the Monitoring Trustee with all
   managerial and administrative support that it may reasonably request on behalf of the
   management of the Divestment Business. This shall include all administrative support
   functions relating to the Divestment Business which are currently carried out at
   headquarters level. Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson shall provide and shall cause its
   advisors to provide the Monitoring Trustee, on request, with the information submitted to
   potential purchasers, in particular give the Monitoring Trustee access to the data room
   documentation and all other information granted to potential purchasers in the due
   diligence procedure. Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson shall inform the Monitoring
   Trustee on possible purchasers, submit a list of potential purchasers, and keep the
   Monitoring Trustee informed of all developments in the divestiture process.
29 Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson shall grant or procure Affiliated Undertakings to
   grant comprehensive powers of attorney, duly executed, to the Divestiture Trustee to effect
   the sale, the Closing and all actions and declarations which the Divestiture Trustee
   considers necessary or appropriate to achieve the sale and the Closing, including the
   appointment of advisors to assist with the sale process. Upon request of the Divestiture
                                                 30

   Trustee, Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson shall cause the documents required for
   effecting the sale and the Closing to be duly executed.
30 The Parties shall indemnify the Trustee and its employees and agents (each an
   Indemnified Party”) and hold each Indemnified Party harmless against, and hereby
   agrees that an Indemnified Party shall have no liability to any of the Parties for any
   liabilities arising out of the performance of the Trustee’s duties under the Commitments,
   except to the extent that such liabilities result from the wilful default, recklessness, gross
   negligence or bad faith of the Trustee, its employees, agents or advisers.
31 At the expense of the Parties, the Trustee may appoint advisors (in particular for corporate
   finance or legal advice), subject to the Parties’ approval (this approval not to be
   unreasonably withheld or delayed) if the Trustee considers the appointment of such
   advisors necessary or appropriate for the performance of its duties and obligations under
   the Mandate, provided that any fees and other expenses incurred by the Trustee are
   reasonable. Should the Parties refuse to approve the advisors proposed by the Trustee,
   the Commission may approve the appointment of such advisors instead, after having
   heard the Parties. Only the Trustee shall be entitled to issue instructions to the advisors.
   Paragraph 30 shall apply mutatis mutandis. In the Trustee Divestiture Period, the
   Divestiture Trustee may use advisors who served Watson Wyatt and/or Towers Watson
   during the Divestiture Period if the Divestiture Trustee considers this in the best interest of
   an expedient sale.
   IV.      Replacement, discharge and reappointment of the Trustee
32 If the Trustee ceases to perform its functions under the Commitments or for any other
   good cause, including the exposure of the Trustee to a conflict of interest:
   (a)         the Commission may, after hearing the Trustee, require the Parties to replace the
               Trustee, or
   (b)         the Parties, with the prior approval of the Commission, may replace the Trustee.
33 If the Trustee is removed according to paragraph 32, the Trustee may be required to
   continue in its function until a new Trustee is in place to whom the Trustee has effected a
   full hand over of all relevant information. The new Trustee shall be appointed in
   accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraphs 17-22.
34 Beside the removal according to paragraph 32, the Trustee shall cease to act as Trustee
   only after the Commission has discharged it from its duties after the Commitments with
   which the Trustee has been entrusted have been implemented. However, the Commission
   may at any time require the reappointment of the Monitoring Trustee if it subsequently
   appears that the relevant remedies might not have been fully and properly implemented.
                                                  31

Section F.    The Review Clause
35       The Commission may, where appropriate, in response to a request from the Parties
         showing good cause and accompanied by a report from the Monitoring Trustee:
         (i)   grant an extension of the time periods foreseen in the Commitments; or
         (ii)  waive, modify or substitute, in exceptional circumstances, one or more of the
               undertakings in these Commitments.
         Where the Parties seek an extension of a time period, they shall submit a request to the
         Commission no later than one month before the expiry of that period, showing good
         cause. Only in exceptional circumstances shall the Parties be entitled to request an
         extension within the last month of any period.
                                                     32

     SCHEDULE
1   Legal and functional structure
    The Divestment Business as operated to date has the following legal and functional structure:
    The VIPitech business of Watson Wyatt forms an integrated part of Watson Wyatt Limited,
    which is located and registered at:
    Watson Wyatt Limited
    Watson House
    London Road
    Reigate
    RH2 9PQ
    United Kingdom
2   VIPitech Assets
2.1 Following paragraph 4 of these Commitments, the Divestment Business includes, but is not
    limited to the tangible and intangible assets set out below:
       •    all the source codes of:
                  •   the VIPitech Modeller system
                  •   VIPitech Enterprise Production Server (due for release […])
                  •   the VIPitech Modeller template code
                  •   the VIPitech Grid Connector
       •    all relevant trademarks connected to the VIPitech system and applications (see Annex
            3);
       • all documented know-how; including but not limited to all manuals for users,
         implementation, maintenance, and training used in connection with VIPitech and certain
         pages       related    to   VIPitech,     as   referenced    at    the   external website
         http://www.watsonwyatt.com/services/ifs/software/vip.asp; and on the internal intranet of
         Watson Wyatt
       •    all licence, support and distribution agreements
                                                      33

  3      VIPitech Personnel
  3.1    The VIPitech Business includes all Key Personnel within Watson Wyatt Limited (currently
         located in the United Kingdom) required to continue operation of the VIPitech business
         functions including: (i) Development, (ii) Support, (iii) Product management, (iv) Training; and
         (v) Sales and Distribution who are entirely dedicated to VIPitech. In addition, the VIPitech
         Business includes other VIPitech related Personnel (i.e. not dedicated 100% to the VIPitech
         Business. See also Annex 1.
         Group 1: The Key Personnel - Dedicated to VIPitech
- […] – […] as Hold Separate Manager. […] […] in relation to VIPitech.
- […]– developer
- […]– training
- […]– sales
- […]– support
- […]– developer
- […]– sales
- […]– support
- […]– support
- […]- client management administration
- […]- training administration
          (all the above personnel are in the Insurance & Financial Services practice)
          - […]- e solutions development
          - […]- e sols development
          - […]- e sols development
          - […]- e sols development
          - […]- e sols development
          - […]- e solutions support and deployment
          - […]- e solutions support
          - […]- e solutions support
          - […]- e solutions testing
                                                        34

    Group 2 Other VIPitech related Personnel (i.e. personnel that are involved with the
    VIPitech Business but which are not dedicated to it and have other responsibilities
    within Watson Wyatt or who are based outside the United Kingdom)
     - […]- senior consultant and […]
     - […]- client manager
     - […]– administrator […]
     - […]– sales (US based)
     - […] – sales (Hong Kong based)
     - […] – support
     - […]- Consultant - (advisory role to the VIPitech Business)
     - […]Consultant - (advisory role to the VIPitech Business)
     - […]–sales (US based)
3.2 The VIPitech Hold Separate Manager is […].
4   VIPitech Customers
4.1 A list of current VIPitech customers is attached at Annex 2 to this Schedule. [This Annex is
    confidential in its entirety] In any divestiture of the Divestment Business, Watson Wyatt and/or
    Towers Watson undertake to use their best endeavours to procure the transfer of these
    customers to the Purchaser.
5   Transitional Arrangements.
5.1 All functions which are essential to the Divestment Business are operated at the level of the
    existing VIPitech Business of Watson Wyatt. The Divestment Business currently benefits from
    general corporate support functions provided by Watson Wyatt including, for example, HR
    support. However, these general corporate support functions are not specific to the
    Divestment Business and any prospective buyer of the Divestment Business would have
    these functions available as part of its own pre-existing infrastructure.
5.2 It is therefore not anticipated that it would be necessary for arrangements to be put in place for
    the supply of any of these support services for a transitional period, but Watson Wyatt, Towers
    Watson, or their Affiliated Undertakings would be prepared to agree to supply any such
    services on arm’s length terms after Closing, if required by the Commission at the request of
    the Purchaser, for a transitional period of twelve months.
                                                       35
