                       EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 14.5.2009
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2009) D/2686
                                                                 C(2009) 3994
   In the published version of this decision, some
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004                            PUBLIC VERSON
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                       MERGER PROCEDURE
   general description.                                             ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
   This text is published for information purposes only.
             Only the German text is authentic.                      SIMPLIFIED PROCEDURE
To the notifying party:
Dear Madam(s) and/or Sir(s),
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.5508 – SOFFIN/ HYPO REAL ESTATE
                Notification of 14 April 2009 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC)
                                1
                No 139/2004
                Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 91/17,
                21.4.2009, p. 17
1.    On 14 April 2009, the Commission received notification of a proposed concentration
      pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by which the Financial
      Market Stabilisation Fund (commonly known as "Sonderfonds Finanzmarktstabilisierung"
      and further referred to below as "SoFFin", Germany), controlled by the Federal Republic of
      Germany, acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation control
      of the whole of the undertaking Hypo Real Estate Holding AG ("HRE", Germany) by way
      of public bid announced on 9 April 2009.
1   OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

I.    THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
     Parties
2.   On 17 October 2008 the Federal Republic of Germany adopted a legislative package, the
     German Financial Market Stabilisation Act (Finanzmarktstabilisierungsgesetz, "FMStG"),
     aimed at stabilising the financial markets in the current economic crisis. SoFFin, the Special
     Fund Financial Market Stabilisation, was created via this measure with a view to acting as a
     vehicle for state interventions to avert the implications of the current financial crisis and to
     stabilising the financial system in Germany. For this purpose SoFFin is entitled to take
     measures to help financial institutions overcome liquidity squeezes and strengthen their
     equity basis. These measures also include the acquisition of shareholdings in individual
     financial institutions by SoFFin, including controlling stakes within the meaning of the
     Merger Regulation. SoFFin is administered by the Financial Market Stabilisation Agency
     (Finanzmarktstabilisierungsanstalt).
3.   HRE is the holding company of the HRE Group, a Germany-based financial institution.
     HRE is mainly active in financing of commercial real estate, financing of activities of the
     public sector (including public infrastructure and asset based finance) as well as capital
     markets and asset management. As regards its refinancing, HRE is entitled to and active in
     issuing covered bonds ("Pfandbriefe").
     Operation
4.   SoFFin has made a public takeover bid to acquire all of the shares in HRE. In the event that
     the takeover bid is not successful, SoFFin may alternatively acquire all of the shares in
     HRE by nationalisation by law. The SoFFin acquired 38.65% of the shares of HRE by the
     take-over bid. Given that it had already 8.65% it has now a share of 47.31%. The presence
     in the general assembly in the last three years ranged between 40% in 2006 and 55% in
     2007 while in 2008 50% of the shareholders attended. Due to these attendance rates,
     SoFFin acquired de facto control over HRE. SoFFin will not in any way be constrained in
     its exercise of the voting rights in HRE post-transaction. The proposed transaction,
     independently of its precise final structure, will therefore enable SoFFin to acquire sole
     control of HRE. Thus, the proposed transaction constitutes a concentration within the
     meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
     Assessment of Commission's jurisdiction – calculation of relevant turnover based on
     economic units with independent power of decision
5.   In the present case the Commission follows a two step approach for determining whether or
     not the acquisition by the German Federal State (further referred to as "Bund") via SoFFin
     of control of HRE is notifiable under the Merger Regulation. This approach consists (i) in
     establishing whether HRE will post-transaction make up an economic unit that retains an
     independent power of decision2; (ii) if this is not clearly the case, establishing which is the
2  Recital 22 of Merger Regulation: Recital 22 of the EC Merger Regulation makes clear that the principle of non-
   discrimination between the public and private sectors requires the Commission "to take account of undertakings
   making up an economic unit with an independent power of decision, irrespective of the way in which their
   capital is held or of the rules of administrative supervision applicable to them" in order to establish which
   undertakings, amongst all those controlled by the State, should be considered for the establishment of
   jurisdiction under the EC Merger Regulation.
                                                            2

    ultimate acquiring entity (SoFFin or an entity ultimately controlling SoFFin if SoFFin itself
    cannot be considered having an independent power of decision) and, which other
    undertakings controlled by this ultimate acquiring entity need to be considered for the
    purpose of calculating relevant turnover.
    Assessment of Commission's jurisdiction – assessment of independent power of decision
    of HRE post-transaction
6.  SoFFin will acquire sole control of HRE and there will be no holding arrangement, special
    provisions or other safeguards in place post-transaction that would ensure that HRE retains
    an independent power of decision. There are no provisions that would ensure that HRE
    would despite public ownership autonomously decide about its strategy, business plan and
    budget and decide independently of SoFFin or the entity ultimately controlling SoFFin.
    Consequently, HRE will post-transaction be subject to coordination of commercial conduct
    and will not constitute an economic unit with an independent power of decision within the
    meaning of the Merger Regulation.
    Assessment of Commission's jurisdiction – assessment of independent power of decision
    of SoFFin post-transaction
7.  As HRE will not retain an independent power of decision post-transaction, the Commission
    needs to identify the ultimate acquiring entity and whether there are other undertakings
    controlled (directly or indirectly, solely or jointly) by this entity. Other undertakings
    controlled by the same ultimate acquiring entity within the meaning of the Merger
    Regulation may be subject to coordination with HRE and will therefore need to be
    considered for the purpose of calculating relevant turnover.
8.  Since there are no special holding arrangements in place that would ensure independent
    power of decision for banks over which SoFFin has control within the meaning of the
    Merger Regulation, SoFFin will be the starting point for the assessment. The Commission
    needs to assess whether SoFFin constitutes an economic unit with independent power of
    decision or whether the true centre of decision making is with a public entity at a higher
    level than SoFFin.
9.  While SoFFin has been created with a view to executing the measures aimed at stabilising
    the financial system in Germany, the German Federal Government has defined a
    governance structure according to which the task to manage SoFFin is transferred to the
    Financial Market Stabilisation Fund Agency (Finanzmarktstabilisierungsanstalt, further
    referred to below as "the Agency"). This public law agency does not constitute an
    independent legal entity and is established at the German Central Bank (Deutsche
    Bundesbank), whereas its organisation is separated from the Central Bank.
10. The Agency itself is managed by a Management Committee consisting of three members
    who are appointed by the Federal Ministry of Finance ("BMF") in consultation with the
    German Central Bank. The Management Committee manages the Agency. However,
    insofar as general principles, matters of particular importance or decisions on substantial
    obligations are concerned, an inter-ministerial Steering Committee ("Steering Committee")
    instead of the Agency/its Management Committee shall decide on a proposal made by the
    Management Committee. The Steering Committee in turn is composed of several
    representatives of the German Federal Government and one representative of the German
    Federal States.
11. The Agency is furthermore bound to conform to instructions and decisions issued by BMF
    or the Steering Committee.
                                                   3

12. However, regardless of the exact division of tasks between SoFFin and the Agency and
    regardless of the precise organisational structure of the management of SoFFin and the
    Agency, both SoFFin and the Agency are subject to legal and substantive supervision by
    BMF. This provides for supervision of SoFFin and the Agency by BMF in all legal
    respects, but also as to the appropriateness of its activities.
13. In addition to its supervisory powers, BMF is entitled, based on the Law on the Financial
    Market Stabilisation Fund (Finanzmarktstabilisierungsfondsgesetz, "FMStFG") and the
    Regulation on the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (Finanzmarktstabilisierungsfonds-
    verordnung, "FMStFV")3, to take decisions in general or in individual cases instead of
    decisions of the Agency. In other words BMF can on its own initiative substitute SoFFin or
    the Agency in the decision making.
14. Furthermore, the FMStFV4 provides BMF with a number of rights, which include BMF's
    right to give instructions to SoFFin or the Agency in general and in individual cases
    whereas other entities such as the Steering Committee do not have these rights.
15. In light of the above the Commission finds that none of SoFFin, the Agency, the
    Management Committee, the Steering Committee or the Board related to the Financial
    Market Stabilisation Fund constitute an economic unit that has an independent power of
    decision. On the contrary the Commission concludes that BMF has sufficient powers to
    define the conduct of SoFFin and the Agency.
16. BMF, as part of the Federal Government, is therefore the starting point for the further
    assessment of Commission jurisdiction over the proposed transaction. Whether the BMF,
    the Federal Government as a whole or the Bund constitute the appropriate economic unit
    does not need to be decided for the case at hand since, even on the assumption that the
    Bund were the appropriate level to look at, competition problems do not arise.
    Assessment of Commission's jurisdiction – assessment of BMF
17. It follows from the above that the further assessment of Commission jurisdiction over the
    proposed transaction will take BMF as the starting point upstream of SoFFin/the Agency.
18. BMF supervises, amongst others, Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau ("KfW"). As regards the
    shareholding of KfW, 80% of the shares in KfW are held by the Bund, while 20% are held
    by the Federal States ("Länder"). In the view of the notifying party the Federal Republic of
    Germany controls KfW.
19. KfW is a Germany-based bank under public law, which provides financial services for a
    variety of projects considered to be in the public interest. In line with previous decisions
    regarding state aid and referring to Art. 86 EG, KfW is considered as an undertaking5. KfW
    is also active in lending directly to commercial private-sector undertakings. For instance
    KfW participates in banking consortia for general corporate financing or acquisition finance
    to private-sector undertakings. KfW thereby underwrites […] of the total financing and
    provides its financing strictly on the same terms and conditions as the commercial banks
    participating in the consortium. KfW therefore has a presence in certain markets for
    financial services to clients in Germany. In addition, KfW, through its wholly-owned
    subsidiary KfW IPEX-Bank GmbH, competes with commercial banks in certain markets for
    financial services such as project and export finance.
3  § 1 (3) No. 3 FMStFV.
4  § 1 (3) FMStFV.
5  State Aid decision No. E10/2000 by 8 May 2001 and 27 March 2002.
                                                        4

20. Regardless of the corporate governance of KfW, BMF is, according to § 12 (1) KfWG,
      empowered to supervise KfW in consultation with the Federal Ministry for Economics and
      Technology. BMF in its quality as the supervisory authority is empowered to adopt all
      measures necessary to keep the conduct of KfW's business in conformity with the laws, By-
      Laws and other regulations. The Commission therefore finds that BMF has a broadly
      defined supervisory right related to the entirety of KfW's activities. In addition according to
      § 8 (2) KfWG the Board of Supervisory Directors may adopt amendments to the By-Laws.
      Such amendments must, however, be approved by BMF in its capacity as the supervisory
      authority of KfW.
21. According to § 1a KfW the Federal State ("Bund") guarantees substantially all of KfW's
      liabilities. According to § 2 (4) KfWG the Federal Government is furthermore entitled to
      decide for which activities certain limitations on KfW (e.g. accepting deposits, conduct
      current account business, dealing in securities for third parties) are not applicable. This
      means the Federal Government is empowered to assign certain activities to the KfW if they
      consider these activities in the public interest.
22. With regard to the corporate governance of KfW, according to § 5 (1) of the law on KfW
      ("KfWG"), the governing bodies of KfW are the Board of Managing Directors and the
      Board of Supervisory Directors.
23. The Board of Managing Directors is in charge of managing the business, whereas the Board
      of Supervisory Directors appoints and dismisses members of KfW's Board of Managing
      Directors and supervises the conduct of KfW's business. The Board of Supervisory
      Directors may give general or specific instructions to the Board of Managing Directors. The
      Board of Supervisory Directors consists of 39 members and generally takes its decisions by
      a simple majority of the votes cast. In case of a tie the Chairman has the casting vote. The
      Federal Government is represented by 9 members, amongst which the Federal Minister of
      Finance. The Federal Minster of Finance holds on a rotating basis the positions of Chairman
      and Deputy Chairman of the Board of Supervisory Directors. Moreover, the Federal
      Government appoints further 16 members of the Board of Supervisory Directors.67
24. On the basis of the far-reaching supervisory powers exercised by BMF KfW cannot be
      considered an entity constituting an economic unit with an independent power of decision.
      In addition the Federal Government, especially via BMF, exercises substantial influence on
      KfW's Board of Supervisory Directors. In summary BMF has sufficient power to determine
      the commercial conduct of KfW. Even though the parties argue that the affaires of SoFFin
      and KfW are managed by different departments within the FMF, coordination at least at the
      level of the FMF state secretary and above cannot be excluded. Therefore it cannot be
      concluded that KfW and SoFFin are de facto managed separately by the FMF.
25. For the purpose of assessing jurisdiction over the present case, it is already sufficient to
      include the turnover of KfW at the level of BMF in order to meet the turnover thresholds
      and to conclude that the transaction has a Community dimension. It can therefore be left
      open whether the appropriate economic unit with an independent power of decision is at the
      level of BMF or at a higher level such as the Federal Government or the Bund.
II.    COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6   § 7 KfwG.
7   The remaining members are appointed by the first and second chamber of German parliament, i.e. 7 members
    are appointed by the Bundestag and 7 members by the Bundesrat.
                                                         5

26. In light of the above, the undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide
     turnover for the year 2008 of more than EUR 5 billion8 (HRE: […], Bund (considering
     KfW only): […]). Each of the undertakings has a Community-wide turnover for the year
     2008 in excess of EUR 250 million (HRE: […], Bund (considering KfW only): […]).
     Neither HRE nor KfW achieved more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide
     turnover within one and the same Member State.
27. The notified operation therefore has a Community dimension within the meaning of Article
     1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
III. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
A. Relevant product and geographic markets
28. HRE and KfW are active in commercial mortgaging, credit to public authorities including
     financing of infrastructure like Public-Private-Partnerships and in issuing covered bonds
     ("Pfandbriefe"). The BMF, Federal Government and Bund do not control any other
     undertakings active in these areas and therefore giving rise to a horizontal overlap.
     Commercial mortgaging
29. Commercial mortgaging covers the financing of real estate assets for commercial use.
30. The parties are of the opinion that commercial mortgaging constitutes a separate product
     market.
31. In its previous cases, the Commission indicated that commercial mortgaging was a potential
     sub segment of corporate banking services9 without finally deciding the product market
     definition. The German Bundeskartellamt has defined the markets for mortgaging as
     follows: (i) Financing of residential construction by private persons; (ii) Financing of
     residential construction by companies and (iii) Commercial mortgaging.10
32. The parties are of the opinion that the market for commercial mortgaging is EEA-wide in
     geographic scope.
33. In a previous case the Commission concluded that corporate banking services for small and
     medium enterprises ("SME") and for large corporate customers ("LCCs") belonged to
     separate relevant product markets11. In its previous decisions, the Commission indicated
     that the market for corporate banking for SME is national in geographic scope while
     recognizing that certain corporate banking services have a strong international dimension,
     in particular for large corporate customers12. Accordingly, the geographic scope of the
     market for services to LCCs has been left open13.
34. For the purpose of the current case, the relevant market definition can be left open.
8   Turnover calculated in accordance with article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice of 10 July 2007.
9   Case COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito/HVB, decision of 18 November 2007, para 18; Case COMP/M.4484 –
    Danske Bank/Sampo Bank, decision of 31 January 2007, para 13.
10 Bundeskartellamt, decision of 19 June 2002 (B4-37/02), p. 10.
11 Case COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets, decision of 3 October 2007, para 16.
12 Case COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito/HVB, decision of 18 November 2007, para 41; Case COMP/M.4484 –
    Danske Bank/Sampo Bank, decision of 31 January 2007, para 13.
13 Case COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets, decision of 3 October 2007, §§75-81
                                                          6

    Credit to public authorities
35. Credit to public authorities covers credits to domestic but also foreign public authorities,
    including the financing of infrastructure.
36. The parties are of the opinion that credits to public authorities constitute the relevant
    product market.
37. In a previous decision, the Commission considered credit to local authorities to be a product
    market in its own right, given that customers and conditions of the loans differ from normal
    bank loans.14 The German Bundeskartellamt has also regarded credit to local authorities as
    a separate market due to the legal requirements of the public budget law.15
38. In its previous decisions, the Commission indicated that the market of credit to local
    authorities is national in geographic scope.16
39. For the purpose of the current case, the relevant market definition can be left open,
    including the question whether financing of infrastructure constitutes a separate relevant
    market.
    Covered bonds ("Pfandbriefe)"
40. "Pfandbriefe" are covered bonds which are issued and placed in the capital markets by
    banks with a permission to issue them. Their function is to refinance the issuing banks.
41. In a previous decision, the Commission has left open whether the market for issuing
    "Pfandbriefe" (jumbo covered bonds issued under German law) constitutes a separate
    market. The Bundeskartellamt stated in one decision17 that there is a single market for
    public "Pfandbriefe" and mortgage "Pfandbriefe", given that they are interchangeable. Both
    decisions left open whether jumbo covered bonds (volume of at least EUR 1 billion) and
    bonds with a lower volume constitute separate markets.
42. In the parties' view, the geographic market for "Pfandbriefe" covers at least the EEA.
43. In its previous decision, the Commission left the geographic market definition open.18
44. For the purpose of the current case, the relevant market definition can be left open.
14 Case COMP/M.2400 – Dexia/Artesia, decision of 14 June 2001, para 8.
15 Bundeskartellamt, decision of 19 June 2002 (B4-37/02), p. 10 f.
16 Case COMP/M.2400 – Dexia/Artesia, decision of 14 June 2001, para 12.
17 Bundeskartellamt, decision of 19 June 2002 (B4-37/02), p. 11.
18 Case COMP/M.2400 – Dexia/Artesia, decision of 14 June 2001, para 12.
                                                          7

B. Assessment
45. The proposed transaction does not give rise to affected markets and would have generally
    fallen within the scope of paragraph 5(c) of the Commission Notice on a simplified
    procedure for treatment of certain concentrations under the Merger Regulation19.
46. The activities of HRE and the KfW, mainly via its subsidiary IPEX, horizontally overlap in
    commercial mortgaging and financing, financing of public infrastructure and re-financing
    via covered bonds ("Pfandbriefe"). However, there are no horizontally affected markets.
    Commercial mortgaging
47. With respect to the total commercial mortgaging in Germany, the combined market share of
    the parties would be around [10-20]% (HRE: [10-20]%, IPEX: below [0-5]%). In a
    European market, the combined market share of the parties would be significantly lower;
    and would reach [0-5]%. Taking into account a limitation applied to new business in 2008,
    the combined market share of the parties would be around [5-10]% (HRE: [5-10]%, IPEX:
    below [0-5]%) in Germany and [0-5]% in Europe.
48. The parties stress that HRE and IPEX are not close competitors in commercial mortgaging.
    HRE is mainly active in structuring of financing, i.e. in particular project structuring while
    IPEX's activity is limited at present in the business concerning financing tranches, i.e. only
    in partial financing while the structuring of the financing is in the hands of other banks.
49. Given the low market shares of the parties, in particular the low increment and the fact that
    the parties are not close competitors, it can be concluded that the transaction will not
    significantly impede effective competition in the common market or in a significant part of
    it.
    Credit to public authorities
50. The parties' activities within credit to public authorities overlap only with respect to
    proximate financing of public infrastructure ("kommunalnahe Finanzierungen"). In
    geographic terms, the activities of the parties in the EU overlap only in Germany where the
    combined market share is [0-5]%. According to the estimates of the parties, the combined
    market share in a European market would not be substantially higher given that IPEX is
    only active in Germany and HRE is not active in all Member states. The combined market
    share of the parties would be below 15% in any event.
51. The parties stress that HRE and IPEX are not close competitors in geographic regard. HRE
    focuses on financially strong markets in Western Europe and the US while IPEX is mainly
    active in emerging markets and economically less developed countries. This is the reason
    why their activities within the EU only overlap in Germany.
52. Given the low market shares of the parties and the fact that the parties are not close
    competitors, the Commission concludes that the proposed transaction does not raise
    competition concerns in relation to credit to public authorities.
53. Assuming a separate relevant product market for financing of infrastructure, the combined
    market share of the parties on a European market for financing of infrastructure would be
    around [0-5]% (IPEX: [0-5]%, HRE: [0-5]%). It can be assumed that the combined market
19 OJ C 56, 05.3.2005, p. 32.
                                                    8

     share of the parties would be below 15% in the individual Member States in which they are
     active.
54. The parties point out that HRE intends to wind up this business in the following years. HRE
     will not be active in new infrastructure financing business. HRE is not concluding new
     contracts in this business.
55. Given the low combined market shares and the fact that HRE is not active in new business
     now and in the future, the Commission concludes that the proposed transaction does not
     raise competition concerns in relation to financing of infrastructure.
     Covered bonds ("Pfandbriefe")
56. HRE, in particular via the Depfa-Group, is issuing "Pfandbriefe". KfW is not issuing
     "Pfandbriefe" but holding them within its re-financing and asset management. KfW
     (including IPEX) has invested a volume of EUR […] in HRE "Pfandbriefe". In relation to
     the total investment of the KfW this amounts to only [0-5]%.
57. Given the fact that KfW is not issuing "Pfandbriefe" itself and that holding them represents
     only a marginal part of KfW's total investment, there is no overlap. Therefore the
     Commission concludes that the proposed transaction does not raise competition concerns in
     relation to issuing of "Pfandbriefe".
C. Vertical issues
58. There are no vertically affected markets.
59. There is conveyance business between HRE and KfW to a certain extent, mainly
     concerning the financing of residential real estate assets. The share of HRE in relation to
     KfW's total conveyance business is only [0-5]%.
60. The KfW runs platforms for securitisation, particularly the platform PROMISE/PROVIDE,
     which is also used by HRE. KfW only gets a fee for the use of the platform. The parties
     state that there were […] between HRE and KfW in 2008.
61. There are also no vertically affected markets in relation between HRE and further
     companies that may be controlled by the Federal State of Germany within the meaning of
     the Merger Regulation. The only companies that have – at least theoretically - commercial
     relationships with HRE are […].
62. Between HRE and […] there is only one historical relationship due to a long-term financing
     agreement which has been agreed before […]. At present there is no demand for the
     financing of real estate assets by […] or any of its subsidiaries. There were no new business
     relationships in 2008 between HRE and […]. In any event, the financing of commercial
     mortgages does not represent an important input for […]. In light of […] business strategy
     and cost structure, a vertical relationship with HRE in relation to financing of commercial
     mortgages would therefore not be material to […].20
63. Between HRE and […] there is only one historical relationship. At present there is hardly
     any demand for the financing of real estate assets by […] or any of its subsidiaries. There
     were no new business relationships in 2008 between HRE and […]. In any event, the
20 For a qualification of "important input" in vertical relationships within the meaning of the Merger Regulation
   see paragraph 34 of the Guidelines on the assessment of non-horizontal mergers under the Council Regulation
   on the control of concentrations between undertakings, OJ C 265, 18.10.2008, p. 6–25
                                                             9

    financing of commercial mortgages does not represent an important input for […]. In light
    of […] business strategy and cost structure, a vertical relationship with HRE in relation to
    financing of commercial mortgages would therefore not be material to […].
64. […] is active in the letting, administering, development as well as purchase and sale of
    residential and commercial real estate. In 2008 there were no new business relationships
    between […] and HRE. Moreover, with respect to commercial real estate, […] is a small
    player and its investment in new real estate is marginal.
IV. CONCLUSION
65. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and
    to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
    decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
    139/2004.
                                                      For the Commission
                                                      (signed)
                                                      Lowri Evans
                                                      Deputy Director General
                                                      for Philip Lowe
                                                      Director General
                                                   10
