                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 11.04.1995
                                                                           MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)b DECISION
                                                                       PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                        To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject :           Case No. IV/M.573 - ING/BARINGS
                    Notification of 14 March 1995 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                    N° 4064/89
1.       This notification concerns the acquisition of substantially all the assets and
         liabilities of Baring Brothers & Co. Limited, including all the Baring Brothers &
         Co. Limited subsidiaries except Baring Securities Limited; all the Baring
         Securities Limited subsidiaries (except Baring Futures (Singapore) Pte Limited);
         and, Baring Asset Management Holdings and all its subsidiaries, which are
         collectively referred to as "Barings" in this decision, by subsidiaries of
         Internationale Nederlanden Groep NV ("ING").
2.       After examination of the notification the Commission has concluded that the
         proposed operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and
         does not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
         market and the EEA Agreement.
I        THE PARTIES
3.       ING is a worldwide organization, with its base and origins located in the
         Netherlands, offering a comprehensive range of financial products and services,
         including but not limited to banking and insurance.
4.       Barings plc, the holding company of the assets acquired by ING, together with
         certain subsidiaries, was placed in administration, within the meaning of the
         Insolvency Act 1986 on 27 and 28 February 1995.
Rue de la Loi - 200 B-1049 Brussels, Belgium - Office: ...........
Telephone: direct line (+32-2)29....... exchange 299.11.11 . Fax: 2964301
Telex: COMEU B 21877 . Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                          2
5.  Barings is involved in merchant banking activities, including investment banking,
    corporate banking, venture capital and capital markets operations together with
    securities trading and asset management. Whilst Barings is predominantly UK
    based it has a worldwide sphere of operations.
II  THE OPERATION
6.  The proposed operation concerns the acquisition, by ING, of Barings, together
    with Barings Securities (Japan) Limited, from their administrators. This involves
    the assumption of certain liabilities of Barings together with the recapitalisation
    of the new group owned by ING.
7.  The Commission granted a derogation, on the basis of Article 7(4), on 6 March
    1995 whereby the suspensive effect of the Merger Regulation, on concentrations
    with a community dimension, was waived in relation to this operation. This was
    necessary given the need to effect a rapid completion of the operation in order to
    prevent serious damage to Barings and third parties.
III CONCENTRATION
8.  Whilst Barings plc was placed in administration on 27 and 28 February 1995 and
    control therefore passed to the administrators, this transaction did not form a
    concentration by virtue of Article 3(5)(b).
9.  As the result of the operation ING will have sole control of Barings and Barings
    Securities (Japan) Limited and consequently the operation constitutes a
    concentration within the meaning of Article 3 of the Merger Regulation.
IV  COMMUNITY DIMENSION
10. Based on audited financial statements the parties' combined aggregate worldwide
    turnover, calculated in accordance with Article 5(3), is more than ECU 5,000
    million; in addition, the aggregate Community-wide turnover of both ING and
    Barings exceeds ECU 250 million.
11. Moreover, neither undertaking achieves more than two-thirds of its Community-
    wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The concentration
    therefore has a Community dimension.
V   COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
    Relevant product market
12. The parties have notified that they operate in a number of product areas which
    they identify as the following: retail banking, private banking, venture capital,
    corporate banking, investment banking, foreign exchange and money market
    trading, securities' issuing and trading which may be sub-divided into equities,
    derivatives and fixed income instruments and asset management.

                                                  3
13.     The Commission, in earlier decisions, has already identified a number of areas in
        which banks operate: retail banking1, corporate banking2, investment banking3,
        foreign exchange trading4, asset management5, money market trading6, derivative
        trading7, securities trading8 and bond and commercial paper issues and facilities9.
        For the purposes of the present case, however, it is not necessary to provide a
        definitive conclusion on the relevant product market since, on the basis of the
        assessment set out below, a dominant position would not be created or reinforced
        even on the narrowest product market definition.
        Relevant geographic market
14.     It is considered that certain services such as retail banking10 and, to a certain
        extent, investment banking11 are limited to national or regional boundaries. These
        limitations are due to local language preferences and business cultures and, for
        retail banking, the fact that generally individual customers make use of a local
        branch of a bank.
15.     More generally, financial markets, are in principle international in scope and the
        Commission has already concluded that "money markets trading, foreign exchange
        trading and derivative trading [are] activities whose geographic scope is
        international and are part of the normal business of any bank."12 Nevertheless
        services are often provided through national outlets to local clients. For the
        purposes of the present case, however, it is not necessary to provide a definitive
        conclusion on the relevant geographic market since, on the basis of the assessment
        set out below, a dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the
        narrowest geographic market definition.
        Assessment
16.     In order to gauge the magnitude of the operation, the impact of the acquisition of
        Barings on ING's position in a table of world rankings has been calculated.
        According to a survey published in The Banker in July 1994, and based on core
        capital, as defined by the Bank for International Settlements, ING is ranked
        number 15. As a result of its acquisition of Barings ING's position is unchanged.
        If the core capital of ING Bank, the ING banking sub-group, is employed instead,
        ING Bank's ranking improves from number 74 to 63 as the result of the
        acquisition of Barings. Therefore it is clear that the operation does not appear to
        change the overall relative position of the undertakings.
1
    IVM.391 - BAI/Banca Popolare di Lecco
2
    IV/M.213 - Hong Kong & Shanghai Bank/Midland.
3
    IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
4
    IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
5
    IV/M.357 - Commerzbank/CCR.
6
    IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
7
    IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
8
    IV/M.357 - Commerzbank/CCR.
9
    IV/M.069 - Kyowa/Saitama Banks.
10
    IV/M.391 - BAI/Banca Popolare di Lecco
11
    IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
12
    IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse

                                            4
17. In general the two undertakings are complementary by way of operation and
    geographic spread. There is no appreciable overlap in any Member State in each
    of the areas concerned by the merger, a fact which is demonstrated below:
    -   retail banking : Barings does not have a retail banking business whilst ING's
        operations are predominantly in the Netherlands;
    -   private banking : Barings has principally UK clients as customers for this
        service which is provided through its offices in Guernsey and Switzerland.
        ING's operations are directed towards Dutch individuals in the Netherlands,
        Far East and Latin America;
    -   venture capital : Barings is one of some 60 venture capital fund managers in
        the UK and serves UK companies. ING operates predominantly in the
        Netherlands;
    -   corporate banking : Barings provides services to UK companies whilst ING
        serves Dutch clients located both in the Netherlands and overseas;
    -   investment banking : Barings' business is both in developed and emerging
        markets: in the former about 75% of its income is derived in the UK and the
        rest from other European countries; for emerging markets 50% of Barings'
        income is derived from Asia and a further 25% from Latin America. ING's
        activities in this area are very limited and confined to the Netherlands;
    -   foreign exchange and money market trading : Barings' business is confined to
        acting on behalf of UK clients; ING is itself active on the international
        markets;
    -   securities' trading:
    -   equities :           Barings provides an international service, largely on behalf
                             of US and UK clients, for investment in markets outside the
                             US or UK. ING trades principally Dutch equities on behalf
                             of Dutch clients in the Netherlands.
    -   derivatives :        although both ING and Barings are active in derivatives
                             trading their activities are focused on various instruments in
                             a number of international locations. Therefore neither party
                             is considered to have a significant share of trading on any
                             exchange.
    -   fixed income :       Barings is a very small player in the fixed income bond
                             markets; on the other hand ING's market activities are
                             centred principally in the New York and Sao Paulo markets
                             for Latin American debt and London for European debt.
    -   asset management : nearly half of the assets managed by Barings are for UK
        clients with a negligible amount under management for Dutch undertakings.
        ING's activities are focused on Dutch clients and invested in Dutch equities
        and bonds.

                                          5
18. The Commission has contacted a number of the merged entity's competitors
    operating in both the banking and securities' trading businesses. To the extent that
    either banking or securities' trading may be international in scope, in areas where
    an overlap occurs, ING/Barings would not have a market share of any
    significance.
19. In view of the market shares resulting from the concentration and the structure of
    the various markets concerned, the operation will not create or strengthen a
    dominant position such as to impede effective competition within the common
    market.
VI  CONCLUSION
20. Based on the above findings, the proposed transaction does not raise serious
    doubts as to its compatibility with the common market.
    For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
    functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
    Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                  For the Commission
