                       EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 22/12/2009
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2009) D/12295
                                                                 C(2009) 10714
  In the published version of this decision, some
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004                             PUBLIC VERSION
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information                       MERGER PROCEDURE
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.
                                                                    ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying party:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:      Case No COMP/M.5728 – Crédit Agricole/ Société Générale Asset
              Management
              Notification of 18.11.2009 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
              No 139/20041
1. On the 18th of November 2009, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
    concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the
    Merger Regulation) by which the undertaking Crédit Agricole Group ("CAG", France)
    acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation control of the
    majority of activities of the undertaking Société Générale Asset Management ("SGAM",
    France), as well as the undertaking Etoile Gestion ("EG", France) and 20% of the
    undertaking The TCW Group, Inc. ("TCW", United States).
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
    operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No 139/2004 and does not raise
    serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the EEA Agreement.
1   OJ L 24, 29.1.2004 p. 1.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

I.    THE PARTIES
3. Crédit Agricole Group, the notifying Party, is one of the main banking groups in France.
    CAG is present across the entire spectrum of banking and finance activities. It has a
    network of branches worldwide and serves both retail and corporate customers. CAG is
    present in 70 countries. In the field of asset management, CAG is mainly active through
    its subsidiaries CAAM Group and BFT Gestion, which offer a wide range of products to
    retail investors, institutions, corporate accounts and third-party distributors. CAAM
    Group is active in more than 20 countries worldwide.
4. Société Générale Asset Management is currently controlled by Société Générale ("SG"),
    which is a financial services group based in France. SG is active in three key businesses,
    namely retail banking and financial services, global investment management and
    services, and corporate and investment banking. SGAM is SG's subsidiary offering
    several asset management services, namely the creation and management of mutual
    funds and the provision of portfolio management services.
5. CAG and SG are collectively termed, for the purposes of this Decision, the “Parties”.
II.   THE OPERATION
6. The concentration consists in the acquisition of sole control by CAG of the majority of
    the European and Asian activities of Société Générale Asset Management2 and a 20%
    interest in SGAM's asset management subsidiary in the Unites States, the TCW Group
    Inc. (the target assets are together referred to hereafter as "SGAM"). Excluded from the
    scope of the acquisition are the non-"traditional" or "alternative" asset management
    activities of Société Générale Asset Management in Europe3, as well as its asset
    management businesses in China and Korea and SG's retail distribution network for
    these products.
7. The SGAM assets are to be pooled into a holding company4 together with the majority
    of the asset management business of CAG (the "Holding Company"). CAG will hold
    75% of the Holding Company and SG the remaining 25%. As minority shareholder, SG
    will have no veto rights conferring it decisive influence over the Holding Company
    under the terms of Article 3 of the EC Merger Regulation.
8. As a result of the transaction, CAG would exercise sole control over the target assets of
    SGAM. The proposed transaction therefore constitutes a concentration within the
    meaning of Article 3 (1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
The distribution arrangements
9. Both CAG and SG have also entered into a number of distribution agreements with the
    Holding Company. The two distribution agreements with SG (hereafter the "SG
    Distribution Agreements") provide the Holding Company long term, quasi-exclusive
    access to SG's retail distribution network (including Credit du Nord but excluding its
2   This will include therefore, for example, Étoile Gestion, currently held by Crédit du Nord.
3   This excludes, for example, Lyxor Asset Management.
4   It has been named Amundi Group.
                                                                                                2

    private banking network)5. The products of the combined undertaking will thus be
    distributed inter alia through the retail networks of both Crédit Agricole (which includes
    LCL) and Société Générale.
10. As regards duration, the distribution agreements will be entered into for an initial period
    of […] years, renewable for a further […] years. However, the Shareholder Agreement
    sets out […].
11. Under the SG Distribution Agreements, SG will undertake to procure asset management
    products (excluding formula funds) from the holding company for at least […]% of
    assets under management held by retail distribution clients6, subject to certain
    obligations and limited exceptions. The exceptions are (i) if the Holding Company is
    unable to supply a new type of product required by the SG network, but in this case only
    whilst this inability lasts, i.e., once the Holding Company is in a position to supply it SG
    will cease marketing such third party products (article 3.1 of both distribution
    agreements) (ii) if the Holding Company's products do not meet certain performance
    criteria, and (iii) for formula funds, where SG will maintain production through Lyxor,
    and where SG distribution network is only obliged to procure its requirements for these
    products on […].
12. Whilst the prices for the products distributed through the SG networks will be set by
    agreement between SG and the Holding Company, the SG Distribution Agreements
    allow SG, should it so wish, to reduce the amount of the fee components that
    corresponds to the remuneration of its distribution role (i.e., entry fees, exit fees where
    applicable, and the portion of the management fees which is transferred to the
    distributor on an ongoing basis by way of retrocession). These arrangements on fees are
    described by the notifying Party as a "fundamental principle" of the agreement from
    SG's perspective.
Position of the notifying Party on the SG Distribution Agreements
13. The notifying Party considers that the SG Distribution Agreements do not give CAG
    control over the SG retail network7. Nonetheless, these agreements are considered by
    the notifying Party to be a key component of the transaction as it considers access to
    SG's distribution network to be critical for the success of the transaction, and suggesting
    that these Agreements should be considered ancillary to the concentration agreements,
    that is “directly related and necessary to” the transaction in the sense of Article 6(1)(b)
    of the Merger Regulation.
14. To support this claim, CAG points to the significance of the SG Distribution
    Agreements in the overall value of SGAM, reflected in the price paid including the SG
    ownership interest in the Holding Company.
15. Equally, CAG indicates that it is "critical" for SG to have "long term" access to a
    supplier of asset management products following the divestiture of SGAM. CAG also
    argues that the ongoing relationship with the distribution network of SG provided for in
    the SG Distribution Agreements goes beyond a typical distribution agreement as it also
    has certain characteristics of a production outsourcing and specialisation agreement,
5   Considered to be for clients with net worth above €1 million.
6   Article 4.1 of both of the SG Distribution Agreements.
7   Paragraphs 12 and 42 of the notification.
                                                                                               3

    since SG will "retain the ability to design and distribute exclusive, differentiated asset
    management products".
Analysis of the SG Distribution Agreements
16. The Commission agrees with the notifying party's position that the SG Distribution
    Agreements do not enable the Holding Company to control the management, resources
    or commercial policy of SG's retail distribution networks, that therefore the Agreements
    may not be said to lead to an acquisition of control over the SG retail distribution, and
    that therefore there is no concentration at the distribution level. It is also clear that the
    SG Distribution Agreements cannot be considered part of the main object of the
    concentration, which is the acquisition of sole control by CAG over the production
    assets of SGAM.
17. In this context, the Commission observes that the SG Distribution Agreements clearly
    fall outside the scope of the principles set out in the Commission Notice on restrictions
    directly related and necessary to concentrations (the “Notice”)8.
18. The SG Distribution Agreements clearly limit SG's ability and incentive to offer third
    party asset management products to its retail clients.
19. Whilst the SG Distribution Agreements may be considered economically related to the
    concentration as they refer to the retail distribution of the production assets subject to
    the concentration, the issue as to whether they are strictly necessary in the sense of the
    Notice in order to ensure continuity of supply for a transitional period needs to be
    assessed bearing in mind both the scope and duration of the Agreements.
20. As regards the duration of the SG Distribution Agreements, […] the parties will, in all
    likelihood, renew the agreements after the initial […] year contractual term for at least a
    further […] year period. Further evidence of the intention of the parties that these
    distribution arrangements stay in place for at least a […] year period may be found in a
    number of internal documents of Crédit Agricole preparing the transaction9.
21. The notifying Party has not pointed to any exceptional circumstances that may justify
    such a long duration of the Agreements, […] exceeds the five year maximum period
    foreseen in the Notice10. Such a period goes clearly beyond any transitory period that
    might be required either for the replacement of the current relationship of dependency of
    SG on SGAM's products or for CAG to develop distribution channels for the SGAM
    products in addition to the SG retail distribution network, which in any case might
    remain accessible to it on a non-exclusive basis.
22. Furthermore, the scope of the Agreements is very wide, resulting in their having a quasi-
    exclusive nature (referred to by CAG in the notification as a “preferred-supplier” status).
    The […]% purchasing requirement for the SG retail distribution networks has the effect
    of severely restricting the commercial freedom of SG to sell third party asset
    management products to its retail customers, as well as similarly substantially
    foreclosing the SG retail distribution network to such third party suppliers. Indeed, the
    Notice clearly states at paragraph 34 that purchase and supply obligations providing for
    "exclusivity or conferring preferred-supplier or preferred-purchaser status, are not
    necessary to the implementation of the concentration."
8   OJ C 56, 5.3.2005 p. 24.
9   […]
10  Paragraph 33 of the Commission Notice on restrictions directly related and necessary to concentrations cited above.
                                                                                                                        4

23. In conclusion, the wide scope and long duration of the SG Distribution Agreements
    mean that they go significantly beyond what would be reasonably necessary to ensure a
    transitory period of continuity of distribution (for CAG) and supply (for SG) after a
    break-up of SGAM from the SG group.
24. Therefore, as provided for in paragraph 7 of the Notice, the SG Distribution Agreements
    cannot be considered directly related and necessary to the implementation of the
    concentration and are therefore not covered by this Decision. Consequently such
    Agreements remain subject to Articles 101 and 102 TFEU (formerly 81 and 82 of the EC
    Treaty) without prejudice to their compatibility or otherwise with said Articles.
25. Notwithstanding that the scope of the present Decision does not cover the SG
    Distribution Agreements, these arrangements nonetheless need to be taken into
    consideration when assessing the competitive effects of the transaction.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
26. Whilst, the Parties’ combined worldwide turnover was approximately EUR 85 billion
    and each of the parties had a turnover in the EU of more than €250 million in 2008
    (thereby exceeding the thresholds under Article 1(2)(a) and (b) of the Merger
    Regulation), the Parties each achieved more than two-thirds of their EU turnover in one
    and the same Member State, namely France.
27. As the transaction was capable of being reviewed under the national competition laws of
    at least three Member States, namely France, [Czech Republic, Ireland and Italy, the
    Parties requested on May 7th 2009, by means of a reasoned submission pursuant to
    Article 4(5) of the Merger Regulation, that the concentration be examined by the
    Commission. As no Member State competent to examine the concentration under its
    national competition law expressed disagreement as regards the request to refer the case,
    the concentration was deemed to have a Community dimension.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
28. The Parties have argued in the notification that asset management comprises the creation,
    establishment and marketing of retail pooled funds ("collective investment schemes") as
    well as portfolio management services to pension funds, institutions, international
    organizations and private investors. Collective investment schemes have the characteristic
    that the client's assets are a share of all those collectively managed by the asset manager,
    whereas in portfolio management the client delegates to the asset manager the task of
    making investment choices and performing operational activities in connection with its
    investment portfolio.
29. According to the Parties, the differences between the various types of asset management are
    not sufficient to conclude that they constitute separate markets.
30. The Commission has in the past left open the question whether the retail and institutional
    segments of asset management constitute separate product markets.
31. The market investigation in the present case has, however, shown that, as far as the French
    market is concerned, a distinction needs to be drawn between asset management for
    institutional clients (and potentially also for high net worth private clients) and retail
    collective investment schemes, as the conditions of competition are dissimilar between
                                                                                               5

    these two segments. Although such a conclusion might be drawn based on a variety of
    considerations such as the need to build distribution networks and brands, it can in any case
    be concluded definitively for the purposes of the present case as regards the French market
    that these constitute separate segments on the basis of the situation of limited access to
    French retail distribution as further described below, as a result of which supply-side
    substitution does not exercise a sufficient and timely constraint in the retail segment, and all
    the more so in the short term11.
32. The competitive assessment can accordingly be carried out based on the broad separate
    segments for institutional and retail clients. Within each of these segments certain further
    distinctions may also be drawn as detailed below.
A.    Asset Management for Institutional Clients
Relevant product market
33. Institutional clients can be defined as entities such as pension funds, banks or insurance
    companies that purchase asset management products and services, for investment purposes,
    directly from asset management companies rather than via a non-specialized intermediary
    such as a retail bank. Such clients use portfolio management services but also may invest
    directly in collective investment scheme products such as mutual funds. For the purpose of
    this decision, both portfolio management services and collective investment schemes sold
    to institutional clients can be considered to form part of an overall product market for asset
    management for institutional clients.
34. General corporate clients and in particular SMEs are not considered to be institutional
    clients in this sense, since they are provided with asset management products and services
    not directly by the asset management company itself but through general corporate banking
    networks which act as distributors. Such clients are therefore considered as part of the retail
    segment and discussed further in section B below.
35. In recent decisions, the Commission has considered the possibility of further segmenting
    the institutional asset management market based upon a distinction between active and
    passive asset management12. Active asset management consists of strategies applied by
    the investment manager with the goal of outperforming a benchmark, for instance an
    index, while passive asset management merely seeks to replicate the performance of an
    index.13 Passive asset management services rely much more on technology and as a
    consequence normally have lower management fees than active asset management
    services.14
36. The transaction at hand primarily concerns the service of active asset management
    which is the only segment in which the merging parties' activities overlap since SG's
    Lyxor subsidiary, which is specialized in passive asset management, will remain outside
    the scope of the planned transaction.
11  Commission Notice on the definition of the relevant market for the purposes of Community competition law, OJ C372 of 9
    December 1997, pp. 5ff., paragraph 20.
12  COMP/M.5580 Blackrock/BGI, para 10, 13; COMP/M.5341 Allianz / Cominvest
13  COMP/M.5580 Blackrock/BGI.
14  COMP/M. 5341, Allianz/Cominvest; COMP/M.5580 Blackrock/BGI.
                                                                                                                         6

37. The notifying Party considers that active asset management and passive asset management
    are simply different techniques and do not constitute separate markets. Furthermore, this
    Party argues that active and passive asset management have the same customer base
    because the same customers procure both actively and passively managed products. Finally,
    the majority of the providers of asset management services have, in the view of the
    notifying Party, the skills and the necessary IT equipment to provide both services.
38. As mentioned above, however, the price level, in terms of entry and management fees,
    differs significantly between the two segments. Moreover, as the market investigation in
    previous decisions indicated15, the conditions of competition differ between these two
    services and, for instance, switching between passive and active asset management does
    not seem to be easy for the service providers in view of, for instance, the differing skill
    sets needed, technology requirements and the importance of economies of scale in
    passive products.16
39. However, the exact product market definition in this respect can be left open since the
    concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
    market on any of the alternative market definitions considered.
Relevant geographic market
40. Asset management has previously been looked at on the basis of either a national or an
    EEA-wide or even wider scope. The Commission, however, has not concluded on the
    geographically relevant asset management market for institutional investors.17
41. The market investigation in recent cases, as well as in the present case, has provided
    support for the view of the parties that the market for institutional clients may be wider
    than national, as these clients are often willing and able to procure asset management
    products and services beyond their national borders in order to invest.
42. However, for the purpose of the present decision it is not necessary to conclude on the
    exact geographic scope of the asset management market for institutional investors
    because the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
    common market under any alternative market definition.
Competition assessment
43. Both Parties are providers of asset management services for institutional clients. According
    to the notification, they would achieve a combined market share of just below [0-5]% on
    the overall asset management market for institutional clients if an EEA-wide market was
    considered and even less (about [0-5]%) on a global scale, in terms of total assets under
    management ("AuM").18 With respect to France, the Parties submit for 2008 a combined
15  COMP/M. 5341, Allianz/Cominvest; COMP/M.5580 Blackrock/BGI.
16  COMP/M.5580 Blackrock/BGI.
17  COMP/M.5580 Blackrock/BGI; COMP/M.3894 Unicredito/HVB; COMP/M.4844 Fortis/ABN Amro Assets; COMP/M. 5341,
    Allianz/Cominvest.
18  Notwithstanding the fact that AUM presents a balance sheet item rather than a flow measure and therefore may not entirely represent
    the volume of business in any given year, it is used for the purposes of this decision as a practical approximation given that the
    market situation in France has been relatively stable over recent years and also because of the practical difficulty in establishing asset
    inflows on a gross annual basis.
                                                                                                                                            7

    share of about [10-20]%19 of the total assets under management invested in by France-
    based institutions (€954 billion). This calculation is based on the total volume of AuM in
    France minus the volume of assets invested in by French private individuals excluding of
    the captive asset management20, i.e. the assets that are managed intra-group within French
    financial institutions, as is the case, for instance, of the assets of Prédica, CAG's own
    insurance company, which are managed by CAAM.
44. The Parties are the market leaders in France, followed by Natixis, the asset management
    subsidiary of the Groupe Banques Populaires and Caisses d'Epargne ("BPCE"), Axa, BNP
    Paribas and the Banque Postale21.
45. The Parties' market shares according to their own estimates would be higher ([20-30]%) if
    only the segment of active asset management was considered. However, in view of the
    market shares and, more importantly, the characteristics of the asset management market
    for institutional investors, that are described in more detail in the next paragraph, the
    market investigation confirmed that the concentration was unlikely to significantly impede
    effective competition on either the overall asset management market or the active asset
    management segment.
46. Even if France is considered to be the relevant geographic market, it has to be borne in
    mind that institutional investors, taking into account their volume of assets under
    management, have a high degree of bargaining power. Such investors are also well-
    informed buyers with the ability to benchmark the performance of the merged entity against
    its competitors. Consequently, institutional investors can not only negotiate fees but also
    other conditions of the investments and management in question. Furthermore, institutional
    investors do not depend on retail distributors but have the means to directly access asset
    managers including non-French service providers. Therefore, should the parties increase
    fees or lower performance standards following the merger, the market investigation
    indicated that institutional investors always have the possibility to negotiate better terms
    with other French suppliers or to look cross-border for alternatives.
47. In view of the above, it can be concluded that the transaction will not result in serious
    doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the EEA Agreement as
    regards asset management for institutional clients, or any segment thereof.
B.    Asset Management for Retail Clients
Relevant product market
48. Based on the Commission's decisional precedents, the Parties provided, in the notification,
    separate information on assets under management for retail clients. The Parties nonetheless
    argued that three further distinctions were not appropriate, namely (i) between mutual funds
    sold on a standalone basis to private clients and mutual funds sold within a life insurance
    envelope (assurance-vie en unités de compte, AVUC); (ii) between mutual funds
    distributed through the general retail network and funds distributed through private
    banking channels and (iii) between mutual funds sold to private customers on the one
19  No change in comparison with 2007.
20  The exclusion of captive production is in line with the Commission's practice when calculating market volume and shares.
21  Comparative data for all market participants are based on volumes that include captive asset management.
                                                                                                                             8

    hand and funds sold to corporate retail clients on the other. The market investigation cast,
    however, considerable doubt on each of these three assertions of the Parties.
Mutual funds sold within a life insurance envelope
49. In its decision in case M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV, looking at the market from
    the insurance angle, the Commission concluded that, in the context of the Austrian
    market, and contrary to the arguments brought by the Parties to that case, life insurance
    products belonged to a separate relevant product market to investment products
    managed by and sold through banks. In that instance, it was noted that life insurance had
    in the past been analyzed on the basis of three distinct segments, namely risk products,
    pension products and investment products. The need to further distinguish in the context
    of that case between pension and investment products was left open.
50. In the context of the present case, and concerning the potential distinction between
    pension and investment products it is concluded that, within life insurance, pension
    products do not need to be distinguished from investment products since there is no
    general framework for the use of life insurance for pension purposes in France and that
    the fiscal advantages linked to investments in life insurance accrue fully after a period of
    eight years and independent of the absolute age of the policyholder.
51. Concerning the distinction between life insurance products and other products managed and
    sold through banks, in the Commission's decision in case M.5075, the conclusion that life
    insurance products constituted a separate relevant market from products proposed by banks
    was based on the fiscal treatment of such products, risk coverage elements within them, and
    partly guaranteed investment incomes22.
52. In the present case, the Parties pointed to a number of specificities of the French situation
    which, in their view, would justify coming to other conclusions than in the earlier Austrian
    case and including life insurance products within the relevant market as regards France.
    They noted in particular that it was often the same funds that were sold within a life
    insurance envelope as those sold on a standalone basis (held in ordinary safekeeping
    accounts, comptes-titres ordinaires, CTO) and those sold through an alternative fiscal
    envelope known as an equity savings plan (plan d'épargne en actions, PEA). Within
    either of these envelopes, investors can substitute funds, albeit only amongst those
    proposed by the asset manager with whom the envelope is held.
53. The market investigation nonetheless showed that even in the absence of investment
    guarantees and the consequent absence of any exposure on the part of the insurance
    company to the event of the death of the policyholder23, AVUC is clearly distinct from the
    demand side owing to its very different treatment under capital gains and inheritance taxes.
    The fiscal advantages inherent to AVUC pertain principally to the situation in which the
    policyholder dies during the lifetime of the investment, in which case the value of the
    investment is free of inheritance duties up to a threshold of 152.500€, and this regardless of
    the degree of relationship, if any, to the named beneficiary of the policy24. On the other
    hand, the fiscal advantages of PEA are greater, and mature earlier, in the event of survival;
22  M.5075 VIG/EBV, para 28
23  Whilst such guarantees may on occasion be a part of the insurance contract, it was indicated that frequently AVUC was sold with no
    guarantee of this type.
24  Investment duties in France are otherwise progressive in the degree of relatedness to the deceased.
                                                                                                                                     9

    in the event of death, however, the value of the investment passes into the general estate of
    the deceased and is subject to general inheritance duties as well as French rules relating to
    the protection of the financial interests of legal heirs according to which the deceased is
    limited in his or her ability to dispose of his or her estate by testament.
54. The market investigation clearly confirmed that, from the demand side, investing in mutual
    funds through an AVUC policy was not substitutable with the PEA/CTO route, with most
    competitors considering it a separate market and almost all pointing to its very different
    fiscal implications.
55. The Commission nonetheless examined whether the market might be broadened to include
    AVUC in virtue of supply-side substitution since insurers do, albeit only on a limited to
    marginal basis, provide non-insurance funds (whilst all the major banks also offer funds
    with a life insurance envelope).
56. The market investigation indicated that such a broader definition of the relevant market on
    the basis of supply-side substitution was not appropriate on the facts of the present case,
    since insurers could not rapidly enter the PEA/CTO market due to the fact that they are
    foreclosed access to bank distribution channels and appear not or only marginally to
    distribute non-insurance funds themselves (except through captive insurance banks like
    Axa Banque which have a very small banking market share), whereas bank distribution
    channels constitute of the order of 90% of all mass market distribution of mutual funds
    in France outside of those sold under insurance envelopes.
57. The inclusion of otherwise of AVUC within the retail mutual fund market in France can
    nonetheless be left open for the purposes of the present case since, notwithstanding the
    somewhat stronger position of the Parties on a market defined to exclude AVUC, serious
    doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of the notified transaction with the common
    market on either alternative market definition.
Money market funds
58. Although they may be constituted with the legal form of a mutual fund (that is, as a unit
    trust or as an incorporated fund), money market funds constitute relatively short-term
    investment vehicles and are largely used by investors for optimizing working capital, i.e. for
    cash management purposes as they are short-term, low volatility and low risk investment
    instruments.
59. The Parties have recognized that the vast majority of sales of mutual funds to retail
    corporate customers consists of money market funds and also that only a minority of
    individual investors purchase money market funds25. The possible recognition of a separate
    market for money market funds therefore essentially coincides with all mutual funds sold,
    through the retail banking network, to corporate investors and a subset of those sold to
    individual investors.
60. The Parties themselves recognized, in the course of the procedure, that money market
    funds were arguably more closely related in competition terms to other instant-access
25  According to the Parties approximately only 25% of individual clients purchasing mutual funds purchase money market funds,
    although the Banque de France has a somewhat higher estimate of around one-third in terms of AuM, excluding AVUC.
                                                                                                                           10

    and short term savings instruments such as savings accounts and treasury bonds than
    they were to other types of mutual fund.
61. It would also appear for this reason that money market funds rarely if ever enter into the
    composition of investments held within one of the fiscal envelopes, either AVUC or
    PEA.
62. Notwithstanding the fact that French investors hold significant amounts in money
    market funds and that some of these funds are held for investment periods exceeding
    one year, the market investigation nonetheless overwhelmingly confirmed that money
    market funds should be considered in a separate market due to the fact that they address
    very different investment needs. In this regard, the duration of holdings in money-
    market funds viewed ex-post is of less relevance than the lack, ex-ante, on the part of
    the investor, of an investment horizon for the corresponding assets sufficient to justify
    their investment in mutual funds carrying a longer-term return profile and more
    significant entry costs. Money market funds therefore constitute instruments used for the
    management by investors of more liquid assets.
63. From the supply side, it may also be noted that the range of providers of money market
    funds is smaller than of other mutual funds owing to the fact that insurers and boutique
    fund managers are present only to a very limited extent in the market and could not
    easily enter it with a competitive offering.
64. It can be concluded that money market funds should be considered to fall within a
    separate relevant market from other mutual funds.
65. The further definition of the relevant market for money market funds should be
    considered on the basis of two possible segmentations, namely (i) between such funds
    sold to corporate investors and such funds sold to retail investors and (ii) between
    money market funds and other short-term savings instruments.
66. As regards a distinction between private and corporate customers, it can be observed
    that the Commission has in the past systematically made a general distinction between
    retail and corporate banking for merger control purposes26. It can accordingly be
    assumed as a starting point for analysis that from the demand and distribution
    perspective these constitute separate segments, even if from a production standpoint
    they are similar.
67. As regards the possible inclusion of other savings instruments within the relevant
    market, it can be observed that, as regards the present case, such alternative products
    will continue to be distributed by Société Generale in full autonomy as they are not
    affected by the current transaction and therefore, to the extent that they were deemed to
    fall within the relevant market, the competitive assessment would necessarily result in a
    lower level of potential concerns as a result of the transaction than if a market for money
    market funds alone were identified. Accordingly, the competitive analysis below may be
    based on the segment of money market funds alone since, even on this basis, the notified
    transaction does not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
    market.
26  See case COMP/M.4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets, paragraph 12 and cases cited there.
                                                                                             11

Closed funds and funds sold through private banking channels
68. The notified transaction also raises the question of the inclusion or otherwise in the
    relevant retail market for mutual funds of closed funds and funds sold through private
    banking channels.
69. Closed funds are funds which, although they may be held by private individuals, are
    tailor-made for a small group of investors and not distributed through retail channels27.
    Such funds are not open to the subscription of new capital by persons unknown to the
    nominative shareholders. Owing to the amounts involved and the specific terms of the
    mandate, such funds are more closely related to institutional funds, and their distribution
    is dissimilar from mass market retail funds as a result of which the arguments relating to
    a lack of supply-side substitutability may not apply.
70. It may also be noted that the private banking clients of Société Générale are anyway
    outside the scope of exclusivity of the SG Distribution Agreements, such clients having
    access to private banking services from a threshold of […] in assets under management.
    Accordingly, no concentration occurs as a result of the notified transaction in regard to
    this segment of the market.
71. In previous decisions, the Commission has tended towards recognizing the existence of
    a distinct market for private banking, without, however, concluding on the matter. Thus
    at paragraph 36 of the Commission's Decision in case M.4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO
    Assets, a clear distinction is drawn between "mass market retail products" and those
    distributed through private banking channels28. Nonetheless, the motivation in terms of
    the market definition has been on the added value services provided by private banking
    rather than a distribution view.
72. In the present case, the Parties point out that there is no single threshold at which
    individuals have access to private banking, which varies according to the commercial
    policy of each bank. There is similarly no universal definition of the scope of private
    banking services. The Parties argue that in France there has been a trend towards
    broader access to private banking in recent years.
73. It nonetheless remains the case that there is clearly a very large group of individuals
    ("mass market") which has no access to private banking channels and is therefore unable
    to prevail of the commercial conditions for mutual funds offered through such channels.
    For this reason it is appropriate to consider the effects of the concentration on the mass
    market segment separately.
74. Whilst the Parties both have their own private banking subsidiaries, this is not the case
    for a number of their retail banking competitors, with only BNP Paribas significantly
    positioned on this channel.
75. For this reason, it can be concluded that the exclusion of private banking distribution
    from the overall market, at whatever threshold such services were defined, would not
    result in a higher market share for the Parties.
27  This is not the same as so-called "closed-end funds", which are in any case a minor phenomenon in the French retail market (outside
    of real estate funds).
28  See also COMP/M.5341 Allianz/Cominvest at footnote 7
                                                                                                                                    12

76. Moreover, in relation to mass market distribution, as already pointed out, the
    predominance of the banking channel and of captive distribution whereby each major
    bank distributes almost exclusively the asset management products of its affiliate asset
    management company makes it unnecessary to make a distinction, as regards the mass
    market, between production and distribution, with only a competitive fringe of third
    party independent distributors29. In regards to this fringe, the notified transaction is
    without relevant competitive effect, such that it is unnecessary to determine whether
    distribution through private banking channels constitutes a separate market within the
    mutual fund segment or whether it is to be considered together with other third party
    distributors to which private banking customers also have access.
77. It follows that the question of whether or not the relevant market in the present case
    should be restricted to exclude distribution through private banking channels can be left
    open since, regardless of the market definition adopted, the notified transaction does not
    give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market.
Workplace savings schemes
78. One specificity of the French market is the existence of so-called Fonds Communs de
    Placement d' [Entreprise] ("FCPE") which are workplace savings schemes under which
    mutual funds are distributed to final individual customers via their employer. They
    constitute a (discretionary) component of the remuneration of employees who obtain
    fiscal advantages for this investment. The final customer is thus the employee although the
    choice of the provider of such mutual funds is made by the employer.
79. FCPEs constitute a significant part of the total assets under management held by private
    households and may be considered to form part of the retirement planning provisions of
    the individuals concerned, although in common with other French retail investment
    envelopes their fiscal benefits mature over a relatively limited period of time and
    typically well in advance of statutory retirement.
80. The market investigation indicated that once such a fund had been selected by an
    individual's employer, the fiscal incentive to invest the relevant revenues in it was such
    as to exclude, in the vast majority of cases, consideration of alternative investment
    vehicles. Moreover, such funds are not distributed through the same channels as other
    retail funds but rather the employer constitutes, in a sense, the channel of distribution.
    Even if such funds are ultimately held by private individuals, the relevant commercial
    relationship appears to be between the asset manager and the employer30.
81. FCPEs, therefore, are mutual fund envelopes that combine elements of retail and corporate
    distribution. This raises the question of whether FCPEs should be analysed as a separate
    product market. Finally, however, this question can be left open since, regardless of the
    market definition, the concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility
    with the common market.
Conclusions on the relevant market definition
29  This is also acknowledged by the Parties at paragraph 102 of the notification where they deem a separation between production and
    distribution to be "artificial" in the context of the transaction at hand.
30  This does not exclude the possibility that employees are collectively involved, through their representative bodies, in the selection of
    the asset managers to be retained for workplace savings schemes.
                                                                                                                                         13

82. In conclusion, a market can be identified for open retail mutual funds sold to private
    customers, excluding money market funds and workplace savings schemes (FCPE). The
    question of whether or not to include funds sold under a life insurance envelope and
    funds (other than closed funds) sold through private banking channels within this market
    can be left open.
83. The notified transaction also needs to be assessed in regard to its impact on the market
    for money market funds sold respectively to corporate and private customers through
    retail banking networks. It nonetheless can be left open whether or not this market
    includes other savings products offered by banks.
Relevant geographic market
84. Due to the importance of distribution in the market definition, the market for retail
    mutual funds as well as for money market funds inherits the geographic scope of the
    retail banking market and is therefore national in scope31. This approach is accepted by
    the Parties32.
Competition assessment
(a) Retail mutual funds
85. In regard to retail mutual funds, the French market is characterized by predominance of
    the banking channel, which currently still accounts for at least 90% of distribution if
    funds distributed under an insurance envelope are excluded. This has been fully
    confirmed by the market investigation and is in contrast to some other Member States
    where distribution through independent financial advisors and through on-line platforms
    has achieved a higher share of the overall market and in certain cases an open
    distribution architecture is mandated by law.
86. In addition to this, the five large French retail banks all (prior to the transaction) have
    their own asset management subsidiary and distribute almost exclusively products of
    this subsidiary. In the case of the Parties this figure is around […]% for both CAG and
    SG.
87. Subsequent to the transaction, it is intended by the Parties that SG should still distribute
    a similar proportion of products of the merged entity. It is accordingly appropriate to
    consider that the vertically integrated model will, to all extents and purposes, persist
    following the merger albeit by means of contractual rather than ownership relations, as
    CAG will not acquire control over the SG retail distribution network.
88. On this basis, the Commission is called upon to assess the limit scenario which is that
    market position of the combined production entity post-merger will correspond to the
    combined market shares of each entity pre-merger, on the assumption that the access of
    products of the merged entity to the distribution network of SG will be, or is at least
    intended by the Parties to be, essentially similar to that which prevailed when SGAM
    was part of SG.
31  See for instance case COMP/M.5363 Santander/Bradford and Bingley Assets at paragraph 17 and a number of earlier precedents.
32  Paragraph 105 of the notification.
                                                                                                                                14

89. This notwithstanding, it should be recognized that the notified transaction does not
    entail a complete merger at the distribution level. Insofar as the distribution level retains
    autonomy to set prices in relation to the distribution margin, and as explained earlier
    (see recital 12 above), the transaction does not entail a harmonization of practices in this
    regard.
Market shares
90. In the notification, the Parties provided a combined market share of [20-30]% including
    life insurance funds (AVUC), and [30-40]% excluding such funds33. This market share
    was based on data collected by the Banque de France (the French central bank) for its
    "Protide" database34.
91. The Protide database (second and third column in the table below) makes a distinction
    between money market and other funds and accordingly the Parties' data can be cited
    from this source with this distinction included. However, the Protide database does
    include closed funds as well as funds sold through private banking channels.
92. The Commission's own market investigation based on the replies of competitors
    provided a best estimate of the combined share of the Parties of slightly under [30-40]%
    with or without AVUC included (first two columns, confidential information obtained
    by the Commission during the market investigation has been replaced by ranges):
33  This is also excludes SCPIs which are colletive investiment vehicles investing in real estate.
34  Owing to concerns relating to confidentiality, the Commission was unable to obtain from the Banque de France figures for
    competitors on an identifiable basis.
                                                                                                                         15

Table: Market shares of main players in the various possible segments at 31 December
2008
                 With AVUC            Standalone             Protide data          Protide and FFSA
 CAG                  […]    [20-30]%       […]    [20-30]%       […]    [20-30]%      […]     [10-20]%
 SGAM                 […]    [10-20]%       […]      [5-10]%      […]      [0-10]%     […]       [0-10]%
 Combined             […]    [30-40]%       […]    [30-40]%      […]     [30-40]%      […]     [20-30]%
 Axa                             0-5%                   0-5%
 Natixis
 (BPCE)                         5-10%                  5-10%
 BNPP                          20-30%                10-20%
 Poste                          5-10%                  5-10%
 HSBC                            0-5%                   0-5%
 Groupama                        0-5%                   0-5%
 Dexia                           0-5%                   0-5%
 Allianz                         0-5%                   0-5%
 CM                             5-10%                  5-10%
 Others                         5-10%                10-20%
 SG Lyxor                        0-5%                   0-5%
 Total                […]      100,0%       […]      100,0%      […]                   […]
Note: The first two columns on the left regards data obtained from the market investigation and include
SCPIs, and exclude in both cases both closed funds and money market funds. The third column refers to
Protide database Secteur 14 data that refers to standalone funds held by individuals, without SCPIs and
AVUCs. The last column includes AVUCs (source: French insurance association FFSA) to the Protide data.
93. SCPIs (real estate mutual funds) are not included in the Protide database. The figures in
      the market investigation do however include these funds. These are funds that are
      subject to different rules and tax regimes and are regulated by the Institut de l'Epargne
      Immobilière et Foncière, which also collects data on these funds. Ultimately it may be
      left open whether to include such funds, as on the one hand, the AuM held in such funds
      are marginal (less than 10% of the Protide database figures in the table above), and on
      the other the Parties' hold significantly less AuM in this segment relative to mutual
      funds in the strict sense.
94. Should money market funds be included, the market share picture would not change
      substantially and the competitive assessment would remain identical. The same applies
      to considering money market funds separately, and even considering only retail
      individual customers for money market funds, where the Parties' market shares would be
      significantly lower.
95. The overall picture which emerges from the transaction is, accordingly, a concentration
      from five to four main players on the French retail mutual fund market with the prospect
      for the consumer of a corresponding reduction in choice, even if the Parties have argued
      that any such reduction (if they were to concede it) would be offset by efficiencies
      resulting from the concentration. In this context, the Parties' banking reach is extensive,
      with around 35 million customers, i.e. well over half the French bankable population
      already having accounts with one or other of the Parties.
96. The Commission received in the course of the investigation a number of representations
      by third party fund managers regarding the difficulty of access to the French mass
      market, a difficulty they feared would only be accentuated as a result of the transaction.
97. Whilst there remains a competitive fringe made up of funds distributed through fund
      supermarkets, direct banks and independent financial advisors, most of which funds
                                                                                                       16

    appear to do considerably better in terms of ranking by third-party organizations than
    the funds of the Parties themselves, there remains in the market considerable uncertainty
    as to the capacity of these alternative distribution channels to expand their market share
    and thereby serve to increase the presence and brand recognition on the market of funds
    produced by other entities than the main five, and post-merger four, asset management
    subsidiaries of the major banks.
98. It appears that the penetration of these smaller players is also impeded by the
    importance of brand to the choice of the retail investor. The market investigation
    showed almost unanimously – hereby directly contradicting the claims of the Parties –
    that brand was a important factor in investor choice and also that the distributor's brand
    was as important as that of the producer. The Parties have strong brands in both
    production and distribution, particularly suited (or at least perceived to be particularly
    suited) to the core investment needs of middle market and mass wealthy investors in
    relation to retirement planning and other capital building needs
99. There are nonetheless fewer barriers to expansion of the established players, namely
    BPCE (Natixis), La Banque Postale and BNP Paribas, all of which have an important
    retail footprint and significant share of voice, and may therefore compete for the
    investment needs of the Parties' clients.
100. Insofar as competition is partly based on investment returns, insurer-branded and
    independent funds constitute at least a benchmark competitive constraint. The Parties'
    funds do not seem to be the closest competitors in terms of performance expressed in
    public rankings which the Commission was able to verify during its market
    investigation; however, the nature of competition in the industry could not be fully
    verified and may equally be on other variables such as price (entry/exit/management
    fees), perceived security, flexibility, scope of fund offering, trading facilities etc.
101. In relation to the variable of price, it can be observed that the reference entry and
    management fees will be established by the merged entity and SG for the SG
    distribution retail network. The entry price serves fully to remunerate the distributor and
    according to the Parties may be discounted by the latter depending on its commercial
    policy, so that competition could still exist on the distribution margin component of
    price.
102. Distributors also perceive ongoing commissions representing a fraction of the
    management fee, on a basis which varies between the Parties but is typically on average
    more than half (and varies in function of the value of the assets under management in
    the fund, requiring therefore a non-trivial calculation to be performed). The amount of
    these commissions is subject in the present case, […].
103. In regard to such management commissions, the Parties also retain different
    commercial conditions and they may forego a part of such commissions if they deem
    this desirable in order to increase sales.
104. Given that the combined market share of the Parties remains under [30-40]%, the
    existence of three remaining competitor retail banks in France and of the fringe
    competitors (insurers and fund supermarkets), the fact that the merger does not include
    SG's retail distribution network and that the latter retains the possibility to compete on
    price, the Commission has therefore come, on balance, to the conclusion that the
                                                                                              17

    transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
    market.
105. An important element in the Commission's conclusions is constituted by the
    consideration that the distribution agreement entered into by the Parties, the precise
    effects of which have been difficult for the Commission to determine, is in any case, as
    set out above, not a necessary part of the transaction in the sense of the ECMR and
    therefore falls outside the scope of the Commission's assessment under the ECMR and
    of the present clearance decision pursuant to article 6(1)(b) thereof. Accordingly, the
    question of the compatibility or otherwise of the said agreement with Article 101 TFEU
    remains open.
106. Potential coordinated effects in this market in relation to fund subscription and/or
    management fees were not raised in the market investigation. The evidence available to
    the Commission also provided no indications of a potential concern in this regard, since
    a wide range in the pricing of ostensibly similar funds could be observed.
(b) FCPEs
107. If FCPEs, i.e. French workplace savings, were considered to form part of the market
    of retail mutual funds, the above presented competition assessment would not change. In
    such a scenario, according to the Commission's own market investigation, the parties
    would achieve a slightly higher market share ([30-40]%) which, however, still remains
    moderate. More importantly, the other factors discussed above also apply to a market
    which includes FCPEs.
108. The picture changes if FCPEs are analysed separately. First, according to the
    Commission's own investigation, the combined market shares of the parties on the FCPE
    market segment are somewhat higher (40-45%). Secondly, according to the
    Commission's information FCPEs are almost exclusively provided by the large French
    banks, whereas other financial service providers and non-domestic banks do not seem to
    be active in this segment and smaller French banks only to a very limited extent.
109. This market structure may perhaps be explained by the consideration that employers –
    in cooperation with employees and their representatives - as the direct customers of the
    fiscally advantageous FCPEs, buy these funds from the larger banks that offer these specific
    asset management services as part of their overall corporate banking activities.
110. Notwithstanding the somewhat higher combined market share, it needs to be considered
    that many employers are responsible for making decisions on the investment of relatively
    large volumes of assets, as a result of which they can be presumed to have a degree of
    bargaining power. Employers are also better informed buyers than individual retail clients
    which enables them better to compare the performance of competitors. Even though it is not
    clear whether the market is effectively open to providers outside France due to the specific
    fiscal treatment of FCPEs, French corporate clients can negotiate fees and other contractual
    terms and also switch, in case of an under-performance of their asset manager, to
    competitors.
111. It can therefore be conclude that the notified transaction does not raise serious doubts as
    to its compatibility with the common market on a hypothetical French market for workplace
    savings schemes.
                                                                                              18

C.   Vertical relationships
112. CAG is active, through its subsidiary CACEIS, on two markets that are vertically
   related to asset management, namely custody services and fund administration.
113. In addition, CAG has joint control, together with BNPP, over Fund Channel, a
   logistic platform for the distribution of mutual funds vertically linked to the Parties'
   asset management and mutual fund distribution activities.
Relevant product market
Custody services
114. Custody services comprise the settlement, safekeeping and reporting of customers’
   marketable securities. In previous cases the Commission has indicated that a market for
   custody services within the asset management segment might be considered, and has left
   open the question of whether custody services could be further subdivided into (i) global
   custody services to investment institutions and (ii) domestic or local custody services,
   and within this segment (a) institutional custody services, (b) sub-custody services35 and
   (c) retail custody services.36
115. The precise market definition can be left open in this case as it does not affect the
   conclusions of the competitive assessment of the transaction with regard to vertical links.
Fund administration
116. Fund administration services include the accounting and analysis of the performance
   of portfolios of financial instruments. In previous cases the Commission has considered
   this activity to be one market.37
117. The precise market definition can be left open in this case as it does not affect the
   conclusions of the competitive assessment of the transaction with regard to vertical
   links.
Logistic platforms for the distribution of mutual funds
118. Asset managers can distribute mutual funds through the networks of their own
   group, through bilateral distribution agreements or through distribution platforms such
   as Fund Channel. Distribution platforms are intermediaries between asset managers and
   distributors of mutual funds.
119. The services rendered by distribution platforms such as Fund Channel are the
   calculation, collection and payment of distribution commissions and the management of
   the contractual relationship between asset managers and the distributors. As mentioned
   above, the calculation of the retrocession component of the management fee due to
   distributors according to French market practice is relatively complex, since it requires,
   inter alia, recalculation of the value of assets under management in the various funds
35 M.3781 Crédit Agricole / Caísse d' Epargne / JV, recitals 11 and 20.
36 M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, recital 60, or M.4844 Fortis / ABN AMRO Assets, recital 69.
37 M. 3781 Crédit Agricole / Caísse d' Epargne / JV, recital 21.
                                                                                            19

   sold by a given distributor to clients on a regular basis in order to determine the due
   which is typically calculated on an ad valorem basis.
120. The Commission examined the possible existence of a product market for logistic
   platforms for the distribution of mutual funds in case COMP/M.5517 BNPPIP / CAAM /
   Fund Channel38 but ultimately left the market definition open and decided the case in
   simplified procedure.
121. The precise market definition can also be left open in this case as it does not affect
   the conclusions of the competitive assessment of the transaction with regard to vertical
   links.
Relevant geographic market
Custody services
122. The Commission has in previous cases left open whether the exact geographic scope
   for the provision of custodian services is global, European-wide or national.39
123. The precise market definition can also be left open in this case as it does not affect
   the conclusions of the competitive assessment of the transaction with regard to vertical
   links.
Fund administration
124. The Commission has in previous cases considered and left open whether the
   geographic market of fund administration is worldwide or national in scope.40
125. The precise market definition can also be left open in this case as it does not affect
   the conclusions of the competitive assessment of the transaction with regard to vertical
   links.
Logistic platforms for the distribution of mutual funds
126. In BNPPIP / CAAM / Fund Channel the notifying party submitted that the relevant
   geographic market should be considered to be EEA-wide. The notifying party argued
   that distribution platforms play an interface role between asset managers and mutual
   fund distributors and that both of these operators act on a European level. The
   Commission left the market definition open.
127. The precise market definition can also be left open in this case as it does not affect
   the conclusions of the competitive assessment of the transaction with regard to vertical
   links.
38 M.5517 BNPPIP / CAAM / Fund Channel.
39 M. 3781 Crédit Agricole / Caísse d' Epargne / JV.
40 M. 3781 Crédit Agricole / Caísse d' Epargne / JV, recital 22.
                                                                                         20

 Competition assessment
128. The transaction does not give rise to any vertically affected markets for custody and
   fund administration services if the relevant geographic markets are considered to be
   global or EEA-wide in scope.
129. Vertically affected markets for custody and fund administration services would only
   arise in France if the relevant geographic markets were considered to be national in
   scope. In that case, CAG’s market shares in custody and fund administration services
   would be around [20-30]%.
130. However, the market investigation has not uncovered any significant concerns
   relating to input or customer foreclosure as a result of the vertical link between the
   custody and fund administration services provided by CAG (through CACEIS) and the
   asset management activities to be provided by the merged entity following the
   transaction.
131. In addition, according to the Securities Services Agreement concluded between
   CAG and SG as part of the transaction (Accord Relatif aux Métiers Titres),41 […]. In
   this way, the transaction will not lead to a change in demand for fund administration and
   custody services by SGAM, once it has been combined with the CAAM Group in the
   Holding Company, to CAG in the provision of such services by CACEIS.
132. With regard to the distribution platform Fund Channel, vertically affected markets
   arise in France given the Parties' significant market shares on the asset management and
   fund distribution markets. This may also be the case in virtue of the role played by Fund
   Channel in the distribution of French retail mutual funds and hence its market share on a
   hypothetical French market, although reliable estimates hereof were not available to the
   Commission in the course of the procedure.
133. During the market investigation a few competitors expressed concerns that, as a
   result of the concentration, the Holding Company as well as a strong competitor, BNP
   Paribas, will be linked to the Fund Channel distribution platform thereby enjoying a
   strong negotiation position in their dealings with third party asset managers;
   consequently there was a concern that Fund Channel will have access to two of the
   largest asset managers and that the different commissions currently applied to asset
   managers might be subject to a uniform increase.
134. However, the notifying Party has submitted a number of arguments as to why the
   vertical link between the Parties and Fund Channel in the asset management and
   distribution markets should not raise serious competition concerns. Firstly, Fund
   Channel is only a logistic platform not involved in selecting the funds to be distributed
   by distributors or in the decision by the asset manager as to which of its funds should be
   distributed with the services of Fund Channel. Also, Fund Channel’s clients, that is,
   distributors, are free to choose the extent to which they use Fund Channel’s services for
   any or all of the third party funds that they distribute. Further, the use of Fund Channel
   by asset managers and distributors is non-exclusive and voluntary. Likewise, Fund
   Channel does not entirely replace the commercial relationship between its clients and
   asset managers: although asset managers contract directly with Fund Channel rather
41 Article 1.
                                                                                           21

   than with the distributors to administer the payment of commissions, the commercial
   relationship remains between the asset manager and the relevant distributors. Finally,
   Fund Channel does not currently give any preferential rights or treatment to either CAG
   or BNPP, treating its parents in the same way as any of its other customers.
135. On the basis of these arguments, which also underpinned the Commission's
   clearance decision in case COMP/M.5517, the Commission is satisfied that Fund
   Channel will operate and continue to operate in the future as a neutral distribution
   platform as indicated by the notifying Party, therefore without any impact on
   competition at the fund management or distribution level.
V.   CONCLUSION
136. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
   and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the EEA Agreement. This
   decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No
   139/2004.
                                                    For the Commission
                                                    (signed)
                                                    Neelie KROES
                                                    Member of the Commission
                                                                                         22
