                       EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 26.4.2010
  In the published version of this decision, some
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2010) D/5920
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article               C(2010)2667
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                       PUBLIC VERSION
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                  MERGER PROCEDURE
  general description.                                              ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying party:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.5797 – State Street Corporation/ Intesa Sanpaolo
                Servizi Transazionali/ Sanpaolo Bank
                Notification of 19 March pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
1. On 19 March 2010, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
      pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation, by which State Street Corporation,
      (“STT”, USA) will acquire from Banca Intesa Sanpaolo S.p.A. sole control within the
      meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation of Intesa Sanpaolo Servizi
      Transazionali S.p.A. (Italy) and Sanpaolo Bank s.a. (Luxembourg), by way of purchase
      of shares.
I.      THE PARTIES
2. State Street Corporation ("STT", USA) is a financial holding company based in Boston and
      organized under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. STT, through its direct
      and indirect subsidiaries, is active in the field of financial services at global level, and more
      specifically in the provision of domestic and global securities services to support
      institutional and individual investors in developing and executing their global investment
      strategies. Its main activities comprise global and local custody, fund administration,
      securities lending, operations outsourcing, record keeping, performance management and
      analytics and transfer agency services.
3. Intesa Sanpaolo Servizi Transazionali S.p.A. (ISPSS, "Italy") and Sanpaolo Bank s.a.
      ("SB", Luxembourg; collectively "the Target"), provide, respectively in Italy and
      Luxembourg, global custody services, fund administration services and selected ancillary
1      OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
       the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the
       replacement of "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The terminology
       of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

    services such as securities lending, foreign exchange, transition and collateral management
    and investment analytics. Before the transaction, the Target provides these services mainly
    to funds belonging to the Intesa Sanpaolo group ("ISP", Italy), its parent company, and to a
    lesser extent to third party funds and other clients.
II.   CONCENTRATION
4. Under the terms of the Sale and Purchase Agreement, STT's subsidiary State Street Bank
    Luxembourg s.a. will acquire from ISP 100% of the share capital of the Target.
5. The notified transaction therefore constitutes a concentration in the sense of Article 3(1)(b)
    of the Merger Regulation.
III. UNION DIMENSION
6. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more than
    EUR 5 000 million2 (STT: 7 270 million, the Target: 370 million). Each of them has a
    Union-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (STT: […] million; the Target […]
    million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Union-wide
    turnover within one and the same Member State.
7. The notified operation therefore has a Union dimension in the sense of Article 1(2) of the
    Merger Regulation.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
Relevant Product Markets
8. The parties’ activities overlap in global custody and fund administration. STT will not
    acquire any of ISP’s local custody activities3. In previous decisions, the Commission
    indicated that global custody and fund administration constitute two distinct relevant
    product markets4. In the context of the present case, nonetheless, STT submits that these
    services are commonly provided together and that therefore it is unclear whether they
    should be considered as two separate markets or just as a single market comprising all
    securities services.
9. For the purposes of the decision in the present case, this question can, however, be left
    open, as serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of the notified transaction with
    the internal market, regardless of the exact market definition retained.
Global custody services
2   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p1).
3   The Target does not provide local custody services, i.e. services in a given class or classes of assets constituted
    under national law. To the extent that such services are performed by ISP itself, they are outside the scope of
    the transaction.
4   COMP/M.3027 State Street Corporation/Deutsche Bank Global Security, decision of 16 January 2003;
    COMP/M.3781, Credit Agricole/Caisse d'Epargne/JV, decision of 14 June 2005.
                                                             2

10. Global custody is the service whereby a custodian holds a range of financial assets on
    behalf of its clients. Such clients may include fund managers, insurance companies, banks,
    government institutions and pension funds.
11. In previous Commission decisions5, global custody services have been held to include
    safekeeping of assets, presentation of securities for and reception of securities from clearing
    and settlement platforms, income and dividend processing, arranging of withholding tax
    relief and tax reclaim, other corporate actions such as notification and dealing with bonus
    issues, rights issues and takeovers, proxy voting services, sweeping of uninvested cash and
    transaction and portfolio reporting services. STT submits that global custodians may also
    provide to their clients foreign exchange trading, securities lending, performance
    measurement and risk analysis, and management of cash accounts and cash funds linked to
    securities held in custody.
12. The market investigation in case M.3781 - Credit Agricole/Caisse d'Epargne/JV confirmed
    that these services all form part of a single product market but left open whether global
    custody should be systematically distinguished from local custody (subcustody).
13. The exact product market definition may be left open in this case, as regardless thereof, the
    notified transaction does not lead to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
    market.
           Fund administration
14. According to the notifying Party, fund administration comprises a menu of outsourced
    service offerings such as fund accounting, net asset valuations, depositary bank etc,
    provided to a diverse array of funds such as UCITS6, private equity funds, real estate funds,
    hedge funds and individual accounts. In case M.3781, it was concluded that all of these
    services appeared to constitute a single relevant product market.
15. In STT's view, all these types of client request substantially the same types of services from
    fund administration providers, with minor differences based on the applicable regulatory
    framework.
16. The question nevertheless arises of whether individual managed accounts (IMAs) are
    rightly included within the market definition for fund administration, as argued by the
    Parties, given that the scope of services provided to individual clients appears to be
    narrower than those provided to institutional clients. However, even if IMAs were to be
    excluded from the relevant market in the present case, serious doubts would not arise as to
    the compatibility of the notified transaction with the internal market. On a market of fund
    administration services for IMAs only, the activities of the Parties do not overlap as STT
    does not have individual clients for fund administration in the EU.
Relevant geographic markets
5   M.3027 and M.3781, previously cited. Case COMP/M.5728, Credit Agricole/Societe Generale Asset
    Management, decision of 22 December 2009, para.114; Case COMP/M.5495, Unicredit/Banca IMI/
    EUROTLEX SIM JV, decision of 23 November 2009, para. 43; Case COMP/M.5509, Credit
    Agricole/CACEIS, decision of 8 June 2009, para.11.
6   I.e. funds constituted according to Directive 2001/108/EC.
                                                          3

         Global custody
17. The Parties have argued that global custody is, by its very nature, worldwide in scope. In
    case COMP/M.3781 the Commission looked, however, into the possible existence of
    distinct markets for global custody for clients resident in specific countries, in that case in
    France, based on the observation that a large number of clients held a significant part of
    their investments in French instruments and therefore might prefer a provider of global
    custody having its own local French custody service. However, the Commission did not
    reach a conclusive view and left the exact definition open.
18. In the present case, STT argues that even if the Commission were again to consider such
    national markets, it may not be appropriate to define national markets in the cases of Italy
    and Luxembourg as these Member States do not, in its view, present the characteristics
    which would be necessary to distinguish national markets as previously considered in the
    case of France.
19. In the event that the Commission were nonetheless to decide on the existence of national
    markets for global custody, overlaps would arise in Italy and Luxembourg, but according to
    STT the combined market shares in both cases would still be below 15%.
20. Accordingly, the exact geographic market definition may be left open in this case, as
    regardless thereof, the notified transaction does not lead to serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market.
         Fund administration
21. The Parties argue that the relevant geographic market for fund administration is at least EU-
    wide. In case M.3027, the Commission considered a possible national definition of the
    relevant market, but noted in case M.3781, without concluding on the matter, that the
    arguments of the Parties in that case that the market may be wider than national had been in
    part confirmed by the market investigation.
22. However, even if the relevant market for fund administration were to be national in scope,
    serious doubts would not arise in the two Member States where overlaps arise, namely
    Luxembourg and Italy. Therefore, the exact geographic market definition may be left open
    in the present case.
Assessment
23. In respect of global custody, no affected markets arise, regardless of the market definition
    retained.
24. In respect of fund administration, if this market were to be considered EU-wide in scope
    then the Parties would have, according to their own estimate, a market share of [10-20]%.
    Post-transaction, STT will continue to face competition from a number of large competitors
    such as JP Morgan, BNY Mellon, BNP Paribas and CACEIS (Credit Agricole) as well as
    numerous smaller players.
25. Based on figures from the industry association EFAMA, which the Parties believe to
    significantly overestimate their position due to a number of exclusions in the data (namely
    pension funds, most alternative funds and IMAs), STT would have a market share of [10-
    20]% and the Target a market share of [0-5]%.
                                                    4

26. On a national basis, an affected market would arise only in Italy, with a combined market
    share of at most [20-30]%, although STT is currently present in Italy only on a marginal
    basis with a [0-5]% market share. Excluding IMAs, this figure rises to [30-40]% but the
    increment, at [0-5]%, remains minimal. There is thus no material structural change on a
    hypothetical Italian market for fund administration, on which a number of other competitors
    remain active (Societe Generale, BNP Paribas, RBC Dexia, Banco Popolare and a number
    of smaller providers).
27. The Parties also argue that the fund administration market is contestable and switching
    costs are low.
28. Based on the information provided, serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of the
    notified transaction with the internal market on an EU-wide or national market for fund
    administration.
29. Finally, if the Commission were to follow the suggestion of the Parties and define a single
    market comprising both fund administration and global custody, combined shares on such a
    market would be lower than on the market for fund administration considered separately,
    and therefore a fortiori serious doubts as to the compatibility of the notified transaction with
    the internal market would not arise.
V.    CONCLUSION
30. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
                                                         For the European Commission,
                                                         (signed)
                                                         Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                         Vice-President of the European
                                                         Commission
                                                     5
