                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 9 June 1995
                                                              PUBLIC VERSION
                                                              MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                              ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                            To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.576 - Ferruzzi Finanziaria/Fondiaria
              Notification of 04.05.1995 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     The proposed operation consists in the acquisition by Ferruzzi Finanziaria SpA
       ("Ferruzzi") of the whole of Fondiaria SpA ("Fondiaria"). Hitherto Fondiaria has been
       jointly controlled by Ferruzzi and Macla International SA ("Macla"), a holding company
       regrouping the interests of the heirs of Camillo De Benedetti.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of application of Council Regulation No. 4064/89 and
       does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE OPERATION AND THE PARTIES
3.     Ferruzzi is a holding company with interests in the agro industry, chemical, energy,
       engineering and concrete sectors and (through its interest in Fondiaria) the insurance
       sector. Ferruzzi is a publicly quoted company which is not controlled by any person or
       undertaking.
4.     Macla is a holding company, which essentially holds the interests of the heirs of Mr.
       Camillo De Benedetti
5.     Fondiaria is a holding company active inthe insurance, financial and real estate sectors.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                                -2-
6.   Under the notified operation Ferruzzi will purchase the shareholding of Società Europea
     di Partecipazioni Assicurative e Diverse SA ("SEPAD") in Gaic S.p.A. ("Gaic"). Gaic is
     presently controlled by SEPAD, a company which is jointly owned by Ferruzzi and by
     Paleocapa S.r.l. ("Paleocapa"). The controlling shareholder of Paleocapa is Larochette SA,
     which is jointly controlled by Ferruzzi and by Macla. By letter of 20 April 1995 Ferruzzi
     irrevocably offered to acquire all the shares of SEPAD in Gaic. On 2 May 1995.
SEPAD accepted this offer. Ferruzzi will thereby acquire sole control over Gaic. Gaic controls
Fondiaria directly and indirectly through Gaic International SA.
7.   The notified transaction is undertaken in the framework of the financial restructuring of
     the Ferruzzi group and in particular of its shareholding in Fondiaria.
II.  CONCENTRATION
8.   As a result of this transaction, Ferruzzi will acquire sole control over Gaic, which it
     presently jointly controls with Paleocapa. Ferruzzi will thereby acquire, through Gaic, sole
     control over Fondiaria within the meaning of Article 3(3) of the Merger Regulation.
9.   Gaic is controlled by SEPAD, a company which is jointly controlled (50/50) by Ferruzzi
     and by Paleocapa. This latter company is in its turn controlled by Larochette Corporation
     (Scpa), the general partner of which (with a right of veto over company resolutions) is
     Larochette SA, a company jointly owned (50/50) by Ferruzzi and Macla. Under the by
     laws of Larochette SA, the company is managed by a board of directors composed of 4
     members, of whom two have been appointed by Ferruzzi and the other two directors by
     Macla. The board of directors has the responsibility for all strategic decisions and the
     business policy of the company, which is determined by the joint signature of 3 directors.
     Therefore each of the parties has the possibility to veto the principal decisions of
     Larochette SA. Thus Larochette is jointly controlled by Ferruzzi and Macla.
10. Macla currently has joint control, with Ferruzzi, of both Larochette and SEPAD, which
     latter controls Fondiaria through Gaic. After the proposed operation, Macla will no longer
     have an interest in Fondiaria through Gaic, since Ferruzzi will have passed from joint
     control to sole control, a change which constitutes a concentration under the Merger
     Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
11. The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of the undertakings concerned is more than
     ECU 5,000 million (Ferruzzi 12,385 million Ecu in 1993, Fondiaria 3,267 million Ecu in
     1993); the aggregate Community-wide turnover of each of Ferruzzi and Fondiaria (the
     latter calculated in terms of gross premiums written in accordance with Article 5.3(b) of
     the Merger Regulation) is more than ECU 250 million (Ferruzzi 10,640 million Ecu,
     Fondiaria 3,249 million Ecu); and no undertaking concerned achieves more than two-
     thirds of its aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
     Therefore the concentration has a Community dimension.
IV. COMPATIBILITY
12. In previous decisions concerning the insurance sector the Commission has tended to the
     view that each type of risk insured constitutes a distinct product market (in view of the

                                              -3-
    absence of demand-side substitutability), and that geographic markets continue to
    manifest national characteristics (such as different premiums and distribution channels).
    However, the question of market definition may be left open in the present case, since no
    dominant position is created even on the narrowest market definition (the Italian market of
    the various types of risk insured).
13. The transaction will have little impact on the Italian insurance market since it consists in a
    change from joint to sole control. Furthermore, there is no horizontal market overlap
    between Ferruzzi and Fondiaria, since Ferruzzi's only activity in the insurance market has
    been through its 50% share in Fondiaria. Furthermore Fondiaria's share of the Italian
    insurance market (whatever type of insurance is considered) is relatively modest, between
     1.8% and 15.5% and even on the market (guarantee insurance) where Fondiaria has the
     highest market share there exist strong competitors such as Allianz which holds a
    market share of 13%.
V.  CONCLUSION
14. In view of the above, the proposed concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the Common Market.
                                            *     *
                                               *
    For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                             For the Commission
