                        EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 09.08.2010
                                                                 SG-Greffe(2010) D/12149 / 12150
                                                                 C(2010) 5638
   In the published version of this decision, some
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004                          PUBLIC VERSION
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                MERGER PROCEDURE
   general description.                                            ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.5826 – ANGLO IRISH BANK/ RBS/ ARNOTTS
                Notification of 02.07.2010 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
                Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 187 of
                10.07.2010, p. 15
    1. On 02.07.2010, the European Commission received a notification of a proposed
        concentration pursuant to Article 4 Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the Merger
        Regulation) by which the undertakings Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Limited ("Anglo
        Irish Bank", Ireland) and The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc ("RBS", UK) acquire
        within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint control of the
        undertaking Arnotts Holdings Limited ("Arnotts", Ireland) on a contractual basis.
I.     THE PARTIES
    2. Anglo Irish Bank is the third largest bank in Ireland with an expertise in commercial
        and property finance in three core markets including Ireland, the United Kingdom and
        the United States. Anglo Irish Bank was nationalised on 21 January 2009 following the
        signing into law of the Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act 2009 and is managed on an
        arms' length basis.
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on the
      Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the replacement of
      "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The terminology of the TFEU will
      be used throughout this decision.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

  3. RBS is a holding company listed on the London Stock Exchange and headquartered in
       Edinburgh (UK). RBS' wholly owned subsidiary, Ulster Bank Ireland Limited, is a full
       service retail and corporate bank active across Ireland. RBS was nationalized by the
       UK Government in 2008, which holds 70,3% of its shares. RBS is managed on an
       arms' length basis through UK Financial Investments Limited.
  4. Arnotts operates a small number of retail outlets, including one of Ireland’s oldest
       department stores in the Dublin city centre. Through Art Holdings, Arnotts is
       controlled and 55% owned by the Nesbitt family. Arnotts is involved in the operation
       of non-specialised retail stores selling, a range of predominantly consumer, household
       goods and non-food goods, and operates a number of outlets in the Dublin area.
II.   THE OPERATION
  5. Anglo Irish Bank and RBS ("the banks") intend to restructure Arnotts’ existing debt in
       return for (i) a warrant and a call option concerning the entire issued share capital of
       Arnotts2, and (ii) associated control rights.3
  6. According to the Shareholders Agreement,4 a so-called “Lender Consent” of each
       bank is required in relation to […], as well as a number of other matters likely to
       impact upon the day-to-day operation of the business of Arnotts.5 Once Lender
       Consent is given in respect of any matter, Arnotts and its shareholders are required to
       implement such matters. Furthermore, both banks have by way of “Lender Consent”
       an effective veto right over the exercise of the voting rights attached to the shares held
       by Art Holdings Limited.
  7. Upon completion of the present transaction, the two banks will, on a contractual basis,
       each have important veto rights concerning key strategic decisions […] of Arnotts’
       commercial behaviour. Conversely, Art Holdings Limited will not be in a position to
       exercise decisive influence on Arnotts, given that the two banks’ consent is required
       for the exercise by Art Holdings Limited of its voting rights in Arnotts in respect of
       each of these key strategic decisions and given that Art Holdings Limited can no
       longer decide on Arnotts’ board composition. The above will therefore result in joint
       control by the Anglo Irish Bank and RBS over Arnotts.
2   Arnotts will issue warrants to the banks, which will give each bank the right to subscribe, at par, for new
    shares that will equal 49.5% of the issued share capital in Arnotts. Furthermore, the banks and Art
    Holdings will enter into a call option agreement that will give each bank the right to acquire up to 50% of
    the current issued share capital of Arnotts from Art Holdings.
3   The proposed concentration takes place in the ordinary course of business of managing claims and
    therefore appears to be compatible with the conditions imposed within the context of the State aid support
    given to both banks.
4   The Shareholders’ Agreement has been concluded between the banks, Arnotts and its existing
    management and shareholders.
5   Clause 4.1(a)(ii) of the Shareholders’ Agreement and Schedule 2 of the Shareholders’ Agreement. Lender
    Consent is defined in the Subscription Agreement as: "the prior written consent of the Lenders holding, or
    being entitled to subscribe for, at least 75% in number, of the E Ordinary Shares issued, or which may be
    issued, pursuant to exercise of the Warrants".
                                                          2

  III. CONCENTRATION
    8. On the basis of the above, the envisaged restructuring amounts to a concentration
        within the meaning of Article 3 (1) of the Merger Regulation.
  IV. EU DIMENSION
    9. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
        than EUR 5 billion6 [Anglo Irish Bank: EUR 6,025 million, RBS: EUR 63,692 million
        and Arnotts: EUR […]]. Two of them have an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR
        250 million [Anglo Irish Bank: EUR […], RBS EUR […]] but they do not achieve
        more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same
        Member State. The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension.
   V. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
  A.      The Product and Geographic Markets
    10. Arnotts is present in the market for non-specialised retail. The parents are present in
        banking services markets.
    11. Referring to previous Commission decisions in the sector, the parties submit that there is
        a non-specialised retail market, which can further be sub-divided according to the
        categories of non-food consumable goods7. The geographical scope was previously
        considered as national; the precise market definition was however left open.8
    12. Referring to previous Commission decisions in the sector9, the parties submit that, with
        regard to the parents, within the markets for banking services a distinction shall be made
        between retail banking, corporate banking and financial market services.
    13. However, for the purpose of the present case no precise market definition is necessary,
        since under no alternative product or geographic market definition the present transaction
        raises competition issues.
  B.      Competitive assessment
    14. Arnotts and the parent companies perform different types of activities (non-specialised
        retail as opposed to banking and financial services). Therefore, none of the parents has
        activities in the same markets as Arnotts.
    15. Furthermore Arnotts only represents a very small part of the parents´ portfolio so that
        spill-over effects within the meaning of Article 2(4) of the Merger Regulation as a
        result of the proposed transaction can be discarded.
6 Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
  Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p1).
7 Case COMP/M. 3437 -KKR/Vendex; COMP/M. 5176-CVC/Schuitema.
8 Case M. 3437- KKR / Vendex KBB.
9 COMP/M. 4844-Fortis/ABN Amro Assets and COMP/M. 5384-BNP Paribas/Fortis.
                                                           3

 16. For these reasons, the Commission concludes that the concentration does not raise
     serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market and the EEA Agreement.
VI. CONCLUSION
 17. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
     notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
     EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
     Merger Regulation.
                                                       For the European Commission,
                                                       (signed)
                                                       Štefan FÜLE
                                                       Member of the Commission
                                                  4
