                       EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                  Brussels, 14.10.2010
                                                                  SG-Greffe (2010) D/16126/16127
In the published version of this decision, some                   C(2010) 7204
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
                                                                             PUBLIC VERSION
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                     MERGER PROCEDURE
general description.                                                 ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
 To the notifying parties:
 Dear Sir/Madam,
 Subject:      Case No COMP/M.5968 - ADVENT/ BAIN CAPITAL/ RBS WORLDPAY
               Notification of 9 September 2010 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
               Regulation No 139/20041
               Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 249,
               16.09.2010, p. 26
 1. On 9 September 2010, the European Commission received a notification of a proposed
     concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/20042 by which
     funds controlled by Advent International Corporation (“Advent”, USA) and funds
     controlled by Bain Capital Investors, LLC (“Bain Capital”, USA), acquire within the
     meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint control over the merchant
     payment services business of The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc and its affiliates
     (“RBS WorldPay”, UK) by way of purchase of shares and assets.
 2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
     operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
     doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the EEA Agreement.
 I.   THE PARTIES
 3. Bain Capital is one of the largest private equity investment firms in the world, based in
     the US. Its funds invest in companies across a variety of industries, including
 1       OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
         the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the
         replacement of "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The
         terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
 2       OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the "Merger Regulation").
 Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

    information technology, healthcare, retail and consumer products, communications,
    financial and industrial/manufacturing.
4. Advent is also a private equity investor based in the US. It has holdings in various
    sectors, including industrial, retail, media, communications, information technology,
    internet, healthcare and pharmaceuticals.
5. RBS WorldPay is active in the provision of merchant acquiring and payment card
    processing services and operates through the business divisions: Streamline (providing
    merchant acquiring and processing services in the UK and Ireland), Streamline
    International (providing these services gloabally), the internet based interface
    eCommerce, and RBS WorldPay US, which comprises the aforementioned activities and
    Automated Teller Machine (ATM) driving in the US.
6. RBS WorldPay is one of the businesses which the Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc
    ("RBS") was required to divest in connection with the Commission’s state aid approval
    decision on the group's restructuring.3
II.   THE OPERATION
7. This concentration involves the indirect acquisition, through a series of intermediate
    acquisition vehicles, of joint control by Advent and Bain Capital over RBS WorldPay,
    by way of purchase of shares and assets.
8. Pursuant to the investment agreements, each of Advent and Bain Capital will indirectly
    own ca. [35 – 40]% of the shares of the investment vehicle TopCo and thereby indirectly
    of RBS WorldPay4. Together, Advent and Bain Capital will own a majority of the
    voting equity and be entitled to jointly appoint 6 out of the 10 directors of TopCo’s
    decision making body and the Chairman. By means of a number of agreements signed
    between Advent and Bain Capital, certain decisions cannot be taken without the consent
    of both Advent and Bain Capital. These relate, inter alia, to the appointment or removal
    of directors and the adoption of the annual business plan and budget of RBS WorldPay,
    giving each of them a right to veto these strategic business decisions. No decision on
    these matters can be taken unless both Advent and Bain Capital are in agreement5. The
    other shareholders do not have veto rights over strategic business decisions.
9. It can therefore be concluded that Advent and Bain Capital will exercise joint control
    over RBS WorldPay and hence, the proposed transaction is a concentration within the
    meaning of Article 3(1) of the Merger Regulation.
III. EU DIMENSION
10. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more than
    EUR 5 000 million6 (Advent: EUR […] million; Bain Capital: EUR […] million; RBS
3   See Commission’s State Aid decision of 14 December 2009 in case numbers N 422/2009 and N 621/2009 - United
    Kingdom - Restructuring of Royal Bank of Scotland following its recapitalisation by the State and its participation in
    the Asset Protection Scheme (14 December 2009).
4   […] The remaining ca. [20 – 30]% will be held by RBSG and the existing management team of RBS WorldPay
    (“Management”).
5   […].
6   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Consolidated
    Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p1).
                                                             2

    WorldPay: EUR […] million). Each of them has a EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR
    250 million (Advent: EUR […] million; Bain Capital: EUR […] million; RBS WorldPay:
    EUR […] million). Advent and Bain Capital do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
    aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified
    operation therefore has an EU dimension under Article 1 of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
      1. Market definition
Activities of the JV
11. RBS WorldPay is active in the field of merchant acquiring and processing of payments
    for retail transactions. In previous decisions, the Commission distinguished between
    merchant acquiring and payment card processing services for market definition
    purposes.7 Whereas merchant acquiring comprises the contracting of merchants for
    payment card acceptance and the provision of respective services, the business of
    payment card processing relates to the provision of technical services for payment card
    transactions.
12. The Commission in previous decisions indicated that merchant acquiring might be
    further sub-divided according to the type of card organisation (national or international),
    the type of cards (credit or debit cards) or the brand (e.g. Visa or MasterCard) but
    generally left the precise market definition open.8 Similarly, with respect to processing
    services, the Commission has left open whether issuing processing and acquiring
    processing constitute different product markets.9 With respect to the geographic scope,
    the Commission has indicated that merchant acquiring markets are still national in
    scope, but has left the precise definition for international cards open; similarly, the
    Commission has left open whether processing activities are national or EEA-wide in
    scope.10
13. As the concentration does not raise serious doubts under any possible alternative
    definition, the product and geographic delineation of the relevant markets can be left
    open for the purpose of this decision.
Activities of Advent and Bain Capital
14. The notifying parties have identified one horizontal overlap between the activities of
    two of their fund companies. This concerns the Italian activities of Clear Channel
    Communications, Inc., (“Clear Channel”), a company that Bain Capital controls jointly
    with the private equity company Thomas H.Lee Partners, and Avip, S.p.A. (“Avip”), an
    Advent portfolio company. Both companies are active in the area of outdoor advertising
    in Italy which concerns the provision of outdoor advertising space ranging from
    billboards and street furniture (e.g. bus shelters, free standing panels or kiosks) to
    airports and football stadiums.
      2. Assessment
7   See, for example, COMP/M.4814 - AIB/FDC/JV and COMP/M.4316 -Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC.
8   See, for example, COMP/M.4814 - AIB/FDC/JV and COMP/M.4316 - Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC.
9   See, for example, COMP/M.4814 - AIB/FDC/JV and COMP/M.4316 -Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC.
10  See, for example, COMP/M. 4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO; COMP/M.4814 - AIB/FDC/JV and COMP/M.4316 -Atos
    Origin/Banksys/BCC.
                                                       3

15. Neither of the parents' fund companies carries out any business activities in the merchant
    acquiring or payment processing services where RBS WorldPay is active, nor is engaged
    in activities in a product market which is upstream, downstream or otherwise closely
    related to these markets. For these reasons, the Commission concludes that the
    concentration will not lead to a significant impediment of competition in those markets.
16. Furthermore, spill-over effects within the meaning of Article 2(4) of the Merger
    Regulation as a result of the proposed transaction can be discarded.
17. The parents' activities only overlap in outdoor advertising in Italy. These activities are
    unrelated to RBS WorldPay's markets: neither do they form part of RBS WorldPay's
    markets, nor of a market which is up- or downstream of those of RBS WorldPay or of
    neighbouring markets closely related to these markets. Furthermore, RBS WorldPay
    only represents a small part of the parents' portfolio, so that coordination between
    independent undertakings that restricts competition within the meaning of Article 101(1)
    of the TFEU is highly unlikely.
18. The present decision under the Merger Regulation in no way prejudices RBS'
    obligations according to the above mentioned state aid decision of the Commission of 14
    December 2009.
V. CONCLUSION
19. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
                                                      For the Commission,
                                                      (Signed)
                                                      Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                      Vice-President of the Commission
                                                   4
