                     COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                         Brussels, 17.07.1995
                                                             PUBLIC VERSION
                                                            MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                            ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                         To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.596 - Mitsubishi Bank/Bank of Tokyo
           Notification of 14 June 1995 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.    On 14 June 1995 the Mitsubishi Bank Limited and the Bank ofTokyo Limited notified to the
      Commission an agreement, according to which both undertakings will enter into a full merger.
I.    THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
2.    The Mitsubishi Bank Limited is a Japanese universal banking institution whose scope of
      activities includes retail banking, corporate banking, investment banking and asset management
      services. Although it is mainly active in its domestic market, Japan, the Mitsubishi Bank also
      operates abroad with branches or subsidiaries in 27 countries in the Americas, Europe and the
      Asian-Pacific region.
3.    The Bank of Tokyo Limited is also a Japanese credit institution whose activities include inter
      alia commercial banking, investment banking and lease finance. The Bank of Tokyo has
      extensive international operations, in particular in North America, but is also active in the
      Pacific region, Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Latin America.
4.    The operation will be a full merger on an equal basis by which the two banks will be replaced
      by "The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Ltd.".
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                                        2
II.     CONCENTRATION
5.      The merger between two previously independent undertakings, the Bank of Tokyo Ltd. and the
        Mitsubishi Bank Ltd., constitutes a concentration in the sense of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger
        Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.      The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of the undertakings concerned, calculated in
        accordance with Article 5(3)(a) of the Merger Regulation, exceeded 5,000 Million ECU in the last
        financial year (one tenth of total assets of the Bank of Tokyo amounts to 22,493 Million ECU and
        of the Mitsubishi Bank amounts to 40,040 Million ECU). Both the Bank of Tokyo and the
        Mitsubishi Bank have a Community-wide turnover in excess of 250 Million ECU but do not
        achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover in one and the same
        Member State. The operation therefore has a Community dimension.
IV. COMPATIBILITY
7.      There are seven EU countries in which both the Bank of Tokyo and the Mitsubishi Bank have
        established branches or subsidiaries, namely in Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands,
        Spain and the UK.
        The main activity carried out by the two banks in the above-mentioned countries is related to
        corporate (wholesale) banking. In addition to this main activity both banks also carry out within the
        EU activities related to money markets operations, foreign exchange trading and derivatives
        trading.
8.      Corporate (or wholesale) banking deals with different kinds of loans and advances provided to
        corporate entities including those made in connection with international exports. This activity is
        predominantly national in scope since it usually requires a close relationship between a bank and its
        clients in order to best taylor the funding to the particular needs of the clients. However, in the
        present case in no country within the EU will the combined lending activity of both banks exceed
        a (1)[...] market share.
9.      The money market is a market for short-term (less than one year) loans. In fact, it constitutes a web
        of several interlinked markets in different financial instruments which can be used inter alia by
        banks to finance temporary reserve shortages, by governments to bridge the gap between tax
        receipts and expenditures and by securities brokers and dealers to finance their inventories of
        securities.
        A supplier of funds to the money markets can be virtually anyone with a temporary excess of
        funds. Loans made on the money markets may be either call or time loans. A "call loan" is a loan
        made on a demand basis, which means it is payable at any time either the borrower or the lender
        wants to terminate it. When only the lender can terminate the loan at will these loans are designated
        as "call money". Time loans are those which are made for a definite period of time.
(1)
   [...] Deleted business secrets: less than 5%.

                                                        3
        At least with regard to call loans and call money the money markets can be considered as global
        markets, since they usually consist of an international network of operators doing business by
        telephone, telex or screen based communications.
        European money market operations of both banks mainly comprises call loans and call money. It is
        very difficult to present accurate market shares for these markets but the parties estimate that based
        on call loans and call money statistics in the three major stock exchanges in the world (New York,
        London and Tokyo) the Bank of Tokyo and the Mitsubishi Bank have a combined market share of
        about (1)[...].
10. Foreign exchange deals comprise agreements between two parties to exchange one currency for
        another at an agreed rate and on an agreed date. There are two broad categories of foreign
        transactions - outright transactions and swap transactions. Outright foreign exchange transactions
        include spot transactions and forward transactions.
        The greatest volume of foreign exchange transactions are spot transactions. By convention the
        value date is two business days after the deal is done. A forward exchange contract is a deal which
        specifies the amount of one currency which is to be exchanged for another at a future date, the
        exchange rate being set when the deal is made. The majority of forward foreign exchange
        transactions have a duration of one year or less.
        A foreign exchange swap transaction is the simultaneous purchase and sale of the same amount of
        a given currency for two different dates against the sale and purchase of another.
        The geographic scope of the foreign exchange markets is global and exact figures concerning the
        size of the market are difficult to obtain. However, based on information provided for the five main
        financial centres worldwide (Tokyo, New York, London, HongKong and Singapore), the parties
        estimate that their combined market share for all types of foreign exchange transactions does not
        exceed (1)[...].
11. Both parties are also active in derivatives trading in particular in two kinds of derivatives contracts,
        namely interest rate swaps and currency swaps.
        An interest swap is a transaction in which two counterparties exchange interest payment streams of
        differing character based on an underlying notional principal amount.
        A currency swap is a transaction between two or more parties to exchange interest obligations
        (payments of interest on borrowings) or interest receipts (investment income) between two
        different currencies.
        The geographic scope of these activities is also global and the parties estimate that their combined
        market share would not exceed (1)[...] worldwide.
(2)
   [...] Deleted business secrets: less than 10%.
(3)
   [...] Deleted business secrets: less than 10%.
(4)
   [...] Deleted business secrets: less than 15%.

                                                               4
V.     CONCLUSION
12. Prior to the merger the Mitsubishi Bank was ranked 6th in the world both in terms of assets and
       capital while Bank of Tokyo was ranked 18th in terms of capital and 21st by assets. The merger of
       these two undertakings will produce the largest bank in the world by either measure (capital and
       assets). However, the great majority of the business of both banks is done outside the Community
       and thus the primary effects of the merger will be outside the Community.
13. Based on the above findings, the Commission has come to the conclusion that the proposed
       concentration does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the Common Market.
       For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and to
       declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
       This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                                   For the Commission,
________________
Please note that third parties showing a sufficient interest can obtain a copy of this decision. You are therefore invited to
inform the Commission, within 7 days following notification of this decision, whether you consider that this decision
contains business secrets which you wish to have deleted before distribution to third parties. You should give reasons for
any such request which the Commission will evaluate before distributing copies of the decision to third parties. If the
Commission does not receive a reasoned request within the stipulated period, it will consider that you agree to the
distribution of the full text of the decision. Your request should be sent by registered letter or telefax to:
Commission of the European Communities
Directorate General for Competition (DG IV)
Merger Task Force
150 Avenue de Cortenberg
B-1040 Brussels
Fax no. 32 2 296.43.01
