          EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                            Brussels, 1.2.2012
                                            C(2012) 440 final
                                                      PUBLIC VERSION
                      COMMISSION DECISION
                               of 1.2.2012
                              addressed to:
                           Deutsche Börse AG
                                   and
                            NYSE Euronext
 declaring a concentration to be incompatible with the internal market
               and the functioning of the EEA Agreement
(Case No COMP/M.6166 - DEUTSCHE BÖRSE / NYSE EURONEXT)
                        (Text with EEA relevance)
                    (Only the English text is authentic)

                                          COMMISSION DECISION
                                                    of 1.2.2012
                                                   addressed to:
                                                Deutsche Börse AG
                                                        and
                                                  NYSE Euronext
              (Case No COMP/M.6166 - DEUTSCHE BÖRSE / NYSE EURONEXT)
                                       (Only the English text is authentic)
                                            (Text with EEA relevance)
   THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION,
   Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
   Having regard to the Agreement on the European Economic Area, and in particular Article 57
   thereof,
   Having regard to Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 of 20 January 2004 on the control of
   concentrations between undertakings (the EC Merger Regulation)1, and in particular Article 8(3)
   thereof,
   Having regard to the Commission's Decision of 4 August 2011 to initiate proceedings in this
   case,
   Having given the undertakings concerned the opportunity to make known their views on the
   objections raised by the Commission,
   Having regard to the opinion of the Advisory Committee on Concentrations2,
   1
            OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1. With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on the Functioning of the
            European Union ("the Treaty") has introduced certain changes, such as the replacement of
            "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The terminology of the Treaty
            will be used throughout this decision.
EN                                                       1                                                   EN

   Having regard to the final report of the Hearing Officer in this case 3,
   Whereas:
   1.     INTRODUCTION AND PROCEDURE
   (1)  On 29 June 2011, the Commission received a notification of a proposed transaction
        pursuant to Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 139/20044 ("the Merger Regulation") by
        which the undertakings NYSE Euronext and Deutsche Börse ("the Notifying Parties")
        enter into a full merger within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger Regulation5.
   (2)  After preliminary examination of the notification, the Commission concluded that the
        notified transaction raised serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market,
        in particular as concerns the market for derivatives trading and clearing services and the
        market for cash trading and post-trade services and, therefore, on 4 August 2011
        adopted a decision to initiate proceedings pursuant to Article 6(1)(c) of the Merger
        Regulation.
   (3)  On 5 October 2011, a Statement of Objections ("SO") pursuant to Article 18 of the Merger
        Regulation was addressed to the Notifying Parties. The Notifying Parties replied to the SO
        on 24 October 2011. At the Notifying Parties' request, an Oral Hearing took place on 27
        and 28 October 2011. Twenty-three third parties were admitted to the proceedings as
        interested third parties, ten of them participated in the Oral Hearing.
   (4)  On 20 October 2011, the time limit for taking a final decision in this case was extended by
        seven working days pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 10(3) of the Merger
        Regulation.
   (5)  In order to address competition concerns identified in the SO, the Notifying Parties
        submitted commitments on 17 November 2011. On 21 November 2011, the Notifying
        Parties submitted a revised version of those commitments. The Commission launched a
        market test of those commitments on 22 November 2011.
   (6)  On 1 December 2011, the Notifying Parties addressed to the Commission a letter
        claiming that economic evidence discussed at a meeting of 23 November 2011 between
        the Notifying Parties and the Chief Economist Team constituted new evidence as
        compared to the evidence contained in the SO. Therefore, the Notifying Parties claimed
        that they were not given an opportunity to exercise their rights of defence in relation to
        this evidence. By a letter of 8 December 2011 the Commission informed the Notifying
        Parties that the analyses referred to by the Notifying Parties were based on data
        submitted exclusively by the Notifying Parties and related solely to the objections raised
        in the SO. Nevertheless, the Commission invited the Notifying Parties to provide any
   2
          OJ C ...,...200. , p....
   3
          OJ C ...,...200. , p....
   4
          OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1.
   5
          OJ C 199, 7.7.2011, p. 9.
EN                                                   2                                               EN

        observations they might have. The Notifying Parties responded by a letter of 13
        December 20116.
   (7)  On 12 December 2011, the Notifying Parties submitted a second set of commitments
        which was later amended on 14 December 2011. The market test of the second set of
        commitments was launched on 14 and 15 December 2011.
   (8)  On 16 December 2011, the time limit for taking a final decision in this case was
        extended by an additional thirteen working days pursuant to the second subparagraph of
        Article 10(3) of the Merger Regulation.
   (9)  The Advisory Committee discussed the draft of this Decision on 17 January 2012 and
        issued a favourable opinion.7
   2.     THE PARTIES
   (10) NYSE Euronext ("NYX") is a U.S. holding company that was formed in 2007 through
        the merger of NYSE Group, Inc. and Euronext N.V. NYX is dual-listed in New York and
        Paris. It operates numerous exchanges in the US and Europe. It has four main businesses:
        (i) cash listing services; (ii) cash trading services; (iii) derivatives trading and clearing
        services; and (iv) information services and technology solutions. In particular, in Europe,
        NYX operates NYSE Liffe ("Liffe"), a London-based derivatives exchange that also
        operates derivatives exchanges in Paris, Amsterdam, Brussels, and Lisbon.
   (11) Deutsche Börse ("DB") is a German listed corporation vertically integrated in all aspects
        of cash and derivatives markets. Its activities therefore include cash listing, trading and
        clearing, derivatives trading and clearing, cash post-trade services, namely settlement and
        custody, collateral management and market data and analytics (index licensing and
        information services). In particular, DB is the operator of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange
        (Frankfurter Wertpapierbörse, “FWB”). It also owns, together with SIX Swiss Exchange
        AG (a subsidiary of SIX Group AG, "SIX") Eurex Zürich AG8, which is the parent
        company of Eurex Frankfurt AG ("Eurex")9. Eurex operates the derivatives exchange
        Eurex Deutschland and it holds all of the shares in Eurex Clearing AG (“Eurex Clearing”),
        which is the clearing-house within the DB group.
   6
          Further details on the substance of the contentious analyses are in Section 12 of this Decision.
   7
          Out of 13 Member States present, 12 agreed that the notified transaction should be declared
          incompatible with the internal market and the functioning of the EEA while one abstained.
   8
          DB and SIX own Eurex Zürich AG in equal shares. The economic interest of DB and SIX in Eurex
          Zurich AG amounts to 85% and 15%, respectively. Given that SIX has limited rights over relevant
          strategic decisions, the Notifying Parties submit that DB exercises sole control over Eurex. In June
          2011, DB announced an agreement with SIX to acquire all of the latter's outstanding stake in Eurex as a
          result of which it would obtain full ownership in addition to control. The closing of this transaction is
          not expected to occur before 31 March 2012.
   9
          Eurex Zürich AG holds all the shares of Eurex.
EN                                                        3                                                         EN

   3.     THE TRANSACTION AND THE CONCENTRATION
   (12) Under the Business Combination Agreement signed on 25 February 2011, the notified
        transaction involves the creation of a new corporate entity (“HoldCo”), domiciled in
        Amsterdam and organised under the laws of the Netherlands.
   (13) Following its formation, HoldCo made a public tender offer to acquire all of the issued and
        outstanding shares of DB, in exchange for shares of HoldCo. Following the closing of the
        offer, a newly formed, wholly owned subsidiary of HoldCo incorporated in the US, will
        merge with and into NYX, which will become a wholly owned subsidiary of HoldCo.
        Both transactions are interdependent. Upon completion of the transaction, the current DB
        shareholders will hold approximately 60% of HoldCo, while the current NYX shareholders
        will hold approximately 40% of HoldCo, on a fully diluted basis.
   (14) Therefore, the notified transaction constitutes a concentration within the meaning of
        Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger Regulation.
   4.     UNION DIMENSION
   (15) On the basis of the audited revenue figures of the Notifying Parties, the undertakings
        concerned would have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more than EUR
        5 000 million10 (DB: EUR 2.106 billion; NYX: EUR 3.338 billion). Each of them has a
        Union-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (DB: EUR […]* billion; NYX:
        EUR […]* billion), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
        Union-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified transaction
        would therefore have a Union dimension under Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
   (16) The issues as to whether certain fees charged by US exchanges and rebates granted by
        NYX to customers should be deducted from NYX's audited revenue figures to properly
        reflect its turnover within the meaning of the Merger Regulation may be left open as
        irrespective of this, the notified transaction would still meet the turnover thresholds set
        out in Article 1(3) of the Merger Regulation. Should such fees and rebates not be
        considered as turnover in the sense of the Merger Regulation, the combined aggregate
        world-wide turnover of the undertakings concerned would exceed EUR 2 500 million in
        2010 (DB: EUR […]* billion; NYX: EUR […]* billion). In each of at least three
        Member States, the combined aggregate turnover of the undertakings concerned was
        more than EUR 100 million in 201011. In each of these Member States, the aggregate
        turnover of each of the undertakings concerned was more than EUR 25 million in 2010.
        The aggregate Union-wide turnover of each of the undertakings concerned was more
        than EUR 100 million in 2010.
   (17) In conclusion, regardless of the exact qualification of the fees and rebates referred to in
        Recital (16), the notified transaction has a Union dimension.
   *      Parts of this text have been edited to ensure that confidential information is not disclosed; those parts
          are enclosed in square brackets and marked with an asterisk.
   10
          Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation.
   11
          […]*.
EN                                                       4                                                          EN

   5.      INTRODUCTION
   (18) The notified transaction has an impact on a number of markets or groups of markets,
         namely: (i) derivatives trading and clearing services; (ii) cash listing, trading and post-
         trading services; (iv) market data and index licensing; (v) collateral management and
         (vi) information services and technology solutions.
   (19) The notified transaction gives rise to the creation of the biggest stock exchange in the
         world in terms of revenue, combining the current numbers two and three. The current
         leader, CME Group, would become the world's number two, reaching slightly more than
         half of the merged entity's revenue. The graphic in Figure 1 gives an overview of the net
         revenues in 2010 for the exchange industry.
         Figure 1: Net revenues of the exchange industry in 2010 (in millions)
        Source: DB's internal document, […]*.
   (20) According to DB, the strategic rationale of the notified transaction lies in the creation of
         a "premier global exchange with significant scale and breadth of product offering"
         having "leadership across the value chain (pre-trade, trading, post-trade, market date
         and analytics and technology)"12. The notified transaction confers to the merged entity
         global leadership in derivatives and risk management, creates a number one cash listing
         and trading venue, extends DB's post-trade clearing capabilities across NYSE's
         operations and gives rise to the world's leading market data provider13.
   (21) The following charts in Figure 2 show the anticipated revenue and profit margin splits
         of the merged entity by business line. […]*.
         Figure 2: Net revenue and EBITDA per business line
   […]*
        Source: DB's internal document, […]*.
   12
           DB's internal document, section 5.4 of the Form CO, .[…]*.
   13
           See DB's internal document, section 5.4 of the Form CO,[…]*. Similarly, another DB internal
           document states that the merged entity will be the "world leader in derivatives and risk management",
           "the most compelling exchange provider of technology services and information content", and "the
           global pioneer in international post-trade infrastructure and settlement". See DB's internal document
           Project Gamma, section 5.4 of the Form CO, […]*.
EN                                                        5                                                      EN

   (22) Each of the groups of markets set out in Recital (21) are analysed in this Decision as
        follows:
              - Cash instruments (Section 7);
              - Market data and index licensing (Section 8);
              - Information technology products and services (Section 9);
              - Collateral Management (Section 10); and
              - Derivatives (Section 11).
   6.     INVESTIGATION OF THE CASE
   (23) Given the specialised nature of the markets concerned, the Commission conducted a wide-
        reaching market investigation using all tools provided for under the Merger Regulation. In
        this context, in the first phase, the Commission sent over 600 detailed requests for
        information pursuant to Article 11 of the Merger Regulation covering seven different
        groups of market participants including but not limited to various types of customers
        (direct exchange members, corporates, and investment firms and retail intermediaries),
        competitors and clearing-houses14. Close to 250 responses were received and analysed.
        Moreover, a substantial number of the Notifying Parties' pre-merger internal documents
        were analysed, many of which are outlined in this Decision. In the second phase, the
        Commission sent over 150 questionnaires to targeted market participants active in the
        markets subject to the decision opening the proceedings, receiving over 100 responses,15
   14
          More precisely, during the Phase 1 investigation, 620 questionnaires were sent targeting seven different
          groups of market participants. Three sets of questionnaires were sent to customers:
          • Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase 1, addressed to 269 direct exchange customers. The
              Commission received 116 responses to this questionnaire;
          • Q2 – questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase 1 addressed to 131
              indirect exchange customers , of which 39 provided the Commission with a reply; and
          • Q5 - questionnaire to "corporates" – Phase 1, sent to 136 corporate customers in their capacity of
              listing companies and/or buyer users of derivatives for hedging purposes, and answered by 57
              market participants.
          Competitors' views were requested through the following questionnaires:
          • Q3 – questionnaire to competitors – Phase 1 was sent to 68 competing platforms, namely other
              exchanges or multilateral trading facilities ("MTFs") which provide infrastructure for cash and
              derivatives trading. 27 competitors who received this questionnaire submitted a response;
          • Q4 – questionnaire to clearing entities – Phase 1 was sent to 14 clearing-houses, which provide
              clearing services for cash and derivatives trading. The Commission received 5 replies to this
              questionnaire;
          • Questionnaire Q6 was addressed to and responded by Euroclear;
          • Q7 was sent to and responded by Company X, relating to the provision of connectivity services to
              financial markets participants identified by the Commission.
   15
          The Phase II market investigation, consisted of two different sets of questionnaires targeting
          respectively derivatives markets and the Exchange Traded Funds ("ETF") market (Q12 - Questionnaire
          on ETFs - Phase 2, sent to customers and Q13 - Questionnaire on ETFs (trading platforms) – Phase 2,
          addressing competitors). As concerns derivatives, 159 questionnaires were sent to the following groups:
          • Q8 – questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase 2 was sent to 121 direct exchange
              customers, of which 88 provided an answer;
EN                                                        6                                                        EN

        and conducted more than 20 teleconferences and meetings with a range of customers and
        competitors.16
   (24) In addition, the Commission analysed a substantial amount of both Notifying Parties'
        internal pre-merger documents which are, together with other evidence, the basis for a
        number of findings in this Decision.
   (25) The Notifying Parties criticised the Commission for not conducting any economic or other
        quantitative analyses. The reasons why such analyses were not considered appropriate in
        this case are set out and developed upon in Section 10.1.1.2.1.
   (26) In addition, at various points of the procedure, the Notifying Parties suggested that the
        market investigation and/or market test of the proposed commitments are biased as they
        rely on responses from market participants that pursue their own interests. In this respect,
        the Commission notes that the market investigation and the market tests conducted in the
        present case included a large number of market participants whose contact details were
        provided by the Notifying Parties themselves. As concerns the market tests of the
        commitments in the area of derivatives trading and clearing, the scope of respondents was
        narrowed to cover all market participants active in the relevant derivatives markets either
        as customers, competitors, potential competitors, regulators or clearing entities. In this
        regard, the Commission notes that market participants with direct knowledge of issues
        relating to derivatives are in best position to convey an informed opinion which may
        provide an input for the Commission's findings.17 In all instances, the Commission
        assessed the replies of market participants carefully, critically and objectively.
   (27) The conclusions presented in this Decision are therefore based on an overall analysis of all
        available evidence.18
          •    Three sets of questionnaires were sent to competitors:
                    o Q9 – questionnaire to OTC trading platforms – Phase 2, targeting 13 OTC trading
                        platforms. The Commission received 9 replies to this questionnaire;
                    o Q10 - questionnaire to competitors on derivatives – Phase 2, sent to 23 market participants
                        among exchanges and MTFs. A reply was submitted by 16 addressees;
                    o Q14 - Questionnaire on derivatives – Phase 2 was sent to and responded by ICAP and
                        Tradeweb.
   16
          Overall, 21 teleconferences / meetings were conducted with market participants on issues relating to
          derivatives markets; 4 teleconferences / meetings concerned cash markets.
   17
          On 17 January 2012, after the Advisory Committee had taken place, the Notifying Parties submitted a
          document entitled "Submission in support of merger clearance." In this document, the Notifying Parties
          argued that the Commission should have discounted the views of the Notifying Parties' competitors
          (these being claimed to comprise all competitors and a large number of customers which the Notifying
          Parties claim are their competitors; see sections 11.1.1.2.2.1.6 and 11.1.1.2.2.1.7 of this Decision). In
          this respect, the Commission notes that it has analysed all responses carefully and critically and that
          excluding these participants or their views on a wholesale basis from any market test would amount to
          excluding all competitors and the Notifying Parties' biggest customers. The results of such a market test
          would not have provided accurate and complete picture of the situation.
   18
          In its assessment of the results of the market investigation, the Commission considered only informative
          responses. In this respect, replies of those market participants who declared not to be able to respond to
          certain questions because the relevant question was not relevant to its activities and/or due to lack of
          information, experience and/or knowledge were not taken into account for the purpose of determining
          the group of market participants having provided an informative response.
EN                                                         7                                                         EN

   7.       CASH INSTRUMENTS
   (28) Cash instruments (or securities) comprise equities and bonds. Equities provide a share of
          ownership in a publicly traded company whereas a bond does not provide its holder with
          any such ownership but is only representative of the obligation for the issuer to pay back a
          debt.
   (29) Equities, according to the Notifying Parties, may be further sub-divided into (i) company-
          issued equity (stocks), (ii) Exchange Traded Products ("ETP") such as Exchange Traded
          Funds ("ETFs"), Exchange Traded Commodities/Vehicles ("ETCs/ETVs") or Exchange
          Traded Notes ("ECNs"), and (iii) structured products including warrants and certificates19.
   (30) Bonds (fixed-income securities, or debt instruments), according to the Notifying Parties,
          can be issued by governments (public issuers), semi-private entities (such as public law
          companies), or private companies, and they guarantee the right to repayment, with interest,
          of the borrowed amount, at a specific date.
   (31) The services related to cash instruments are listing, trading, and pre- and post-trade
          services. The legal framework for the provision of these services has been changed by the
          entry into force of the Markets in Financial Instrument Directive ("MiFID")20, aimed in
          particular at making financial markets more transparent and at liberalizing the sector by
          opening access to the market for entities other than traditional exchanges ("Regulated
          markets" under MiFID), such as Multilateral Trading Facilities ("MTFs") and Systematic
          Internalisers ("SIs").
     7.1. CASH LISTING SERVICES
      7.1.1.     Market definition
   (32) Listing is the practice of including a particular cash security in the set of cash securities
          that are available for buying and selling on a particular exchange. This occurs upon request
          of the issuer and it is a way for a company (or a government in the case of bonds) to obtain
          financing.
       7.1.1.1. THE      IMPLICATIONS OF MIFID AND THE PROSPECTUS DIRECTIVE AND THE
                 DISTINCTION BETWEEN LISTING AND ADMISSION TO TRADING IN THE EEA
   (33) In the EEA, Directive 2001/34/EC21 (as amended by Directive 2003/71/EC22, the
          “Prospectus Directive”) on the admission of securities to official stock exchange listing
   19
            Structured products are securities that can be – as stocks and other equities - listed and traded on
            exchanges. They are based on an underlying such as an index, a company-issued equity, a currency or a
            commodity. Structured products are issued by banks, offer a return which is fixed at issuance and are
            often designed for local (retail) investors.
   20
            Directive 2004/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on markets in
            financial instruments ("MiFID"), OJ L 145, 30.4.2004, p.1. The deadline for transposition in Member
            States was 31 January 2007.
   21
            Directive 2001/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 May 2001 on the admission
            of securities to official stock exchange listing and on information to be published on those securities,
            OJ L 184, 6.7.2001, p. 1.
EN                                                          8                                                        EN

         and on information to be published on those securities regulates listing as a Regulated
         Markets23 activity related to the admission of cash securities to trading. Directive
         2001/34/EC provides for common minimum sets of rules and obligations on
         transparency for listing which apply only to Regulated Markets (and do not apply in the
         context of admission to trading on other trading venues) in the context of offering
         securities to the public.
   (34) MiFID imposes requirements on the admission to trading of financial instruments, as
         well as rules regarding the trading of those instruments. Under MiFID, MTFs, including
         those operated by Regulated Markets may admit to trading cash securities without a
         listing within the meaning of MiFID and the process provided for in the Prospectus
         Directive.24
   (35) The Notifying Parties argue that admission to trading by MTFs could not be considered
         as a listing service. Rather, it could be characterised as a measure ancillary to trading. In
         their view, admission to trading differs from listing because it can happen without the
         request or consent of the issuing company and it does not take place in the context of
         capital raising. Listing, however, takes place at the request and with the consent of the
         issuing company and is often used for capital raising.
   (36) The Notifying Parties also submit that, to their knowledge, no precedent distinguishes
         between listing and admission to trading at national level and that, although they may
         entail different reporting and transparency obligations for the issuing company, these
         differences are insufficient to distinguish a separate relevant product market. More
         precisely, the Notifying Parties consider that the regulatory definition of listing services
         should not necessarily correspond to the relevant market for competition law purposes.
      7.1.1.2. EQUITIES AND/OR BOND LISTING SERVICES
   (37) The Notifying Parties submit that for issuing companies, listing of bonds and listing of
         equities are not substitutes and constitute separate markets, in particular because equity
         listings have significant consequences for the ownership and control of a company,
         which are not affected by listing of bonds.
   (38) As regards equities, a company may have one or more listings; namely a primary
         domestic listing and/or, possibly, one or more international listings. The Notifying
         Parties consider that domestic company-issued equity listing refers to listing of equities
         on an exchange in the country where the issuer is incorporated25: for most companies,
         this is the only listing, because there is a strong “home bias”, namely the choice by
         issuers of a listing venue is dictated by factors such as the location of the corporate
   22
           Directive 2003/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 November 2003 on the
           prospectus to be published when securities are offered to the public or admitted to trading and
           amending Directive 2001/34/EC, OJ L 345, 31.12.2003, p. 64.
   23
           It is not possible to list instruments on an MTF within the meaning of MiFID: a listing can only take
           place on Regulated Markets (Article 4(1), (14), and (15) of MiFID). To offer listing services in this
           sense, the operator of an MTF would also have to be authorised as an operator of a Regulated Market.
   24
           The Notifying Parties note that in these instances, namely when the securities are not listed on a
           Regulated Market, the requirements for admission to trading are higher.
   25
           Location of incorporation is the criterion used by the World Federation of Exchanges (“WFE”) to
           distinguish between domestic and international listings.
EN                                                        9                                                      EN

        headquarters, the investor base26, familiarity with the administrative and regulatory
        framework, and the language of procedure. According to the Notifying Parties, the
        geographic scope of the equities market is, by definition, national.
   (39) The Notifying Parties submit that listing of ETPs and structured products is in the same
        relevant market as domestic listing of company-issued equities. This is because these
        cash instruments are listed and tradable as company-issued equities. Moreover, listings
        of ETPs and, in particular, listings of structured products are subject to home bias.
        Therefore, even if ETPs and structured products would form separate markets from
        domestic company-issued equity, listings of ETPs and structured products would be
        national in scope.
   (40) According to the Notifying Parties, international company-issued equity listing is listing
        on an exchange in a country other than where the issuer is incorporated. It includes: (i)
        international listing, where an issuing company chooses to have a primary listing
        abroad; and (ii) secondary listing, or “dual listing,” which is any listing in addition to an
        initial listing. The Notifying Parties submit that international listing and secondary
        listing are part of an overall relevant market for international listings for equities, the
        only difference between them being whether the company obtaining the listing is
        already listed elsewhere. For both these listings, the demand is not subject to "home
        bias".
   (41) With reference to the geographic market, the Notifying Parties submit that the market
        for international listings is worldwide in scope and that competition among exchanges
        takes place on a global basis. An issuing company will generally choose an international
        listing venue for reasons specific to that issuing company, related to its strategic and
        business goals. Given the range of preferences issuing companies exhibit, the Notifying
        Parties submit that no general conclusions can be drawn regarding issuing companies’
        choice to complete an international listing in one region of the world rather than
        another.
   (42) The market investigation has indicated that in choosing the listing venue for
        international listing, a corporate issuer in general only regards, or would only regard,
        Union exchanges as substitutable (that is to say, realistic alternatives to one another).
        However, for some respondents, Union and US exchanges, or even all world exchanges,
        could be considered as substitutable. In any event, the Commission considers on the
        basis of the market investigation that the listing decision of issuing companies depends
        on external factors such as regulation, investor base, business strategies as well as on
        elements influenced by the exchanges themselves (such as listing fees, trading services)
        and the liquidity of the trading venue.
   (43) As regards bonds, the Notifying Parties submit that these instruments are usually listed
        only on one exchange and that the market for bond listing could be segmented
        according to the type of issuer (however, the Notifying Parties do not consider this as a
   26
          Home bias is not limited to retail investors. The Notifying Parties submit that in their experience,
          although the portfolios of large, pan-European or global institutional investors may be less heavily
          weighted with domestic equities than an individual retail investor’s portfolio would be, institutional
          investors still generally exhibit a degree of home bias. This is in part because institutional investors are
          investing on behalf of clients that themselves may have a certain home bias.
EN                                                        10                                                           EN

         plausible segmentation)27. Public issuers and smaller companies list their bonds on their
         domestic exchange ("home bias"). The larger a corporation is – and the larger the
         issuance volume is – the more likely it is that a corporate issuer will list internationally.
         In any event, according to the Notifying Parties, apart from issuers with little
         international exposure or public issuers whose choice may be dictated by practical or
         political reasons, the place of listing would be less relevant for bond issuers because
         almost all bond trading (at least 90% according to the information of the Notifying
         Parties) is conducted over the counter ("OTC").
   (44) Therefore, the Notifying Parties submit that whilst the geographic scope of the market
         for government bonds and small corporate bonds would be national in scope, with
         regard to large corporate issuers, the market would be wider and at least EEA-wide. The
         Commission considers that this submission has been confirmed by the market
         investigation. Nonetheless, the same considerations on the elements driving the listing
         choice for international equity listing seem to apply for bond listing.
      7.1.1.3. CONCLUSION ON MARKET DEFINITION
   (45) The market definition for cash listing services can be left open for the purpose of this
         Decision, since the notified transaction does not raise competition concerns under any
         plausible market definition.
      7.1.2.    Competitive assessment
      7.1.2.1. HORIZONTAL OVERLAPS
   (46) The Notifying Parties both provide cash listing services, domestic and international, for
         equities and bonds.
   (47) DB provides equity and bond listing services in Germany by operating the Frankfurt
         Stock Exchange (Regulated Market under MiFID). Through Scoach Holding S.A., it
         offers listing for structured products in Switzerland28. Moreover, through its MTF DB
         Entry Standard, DB offers admission to trading for small- and mid-cap companies29
         which do not meet the requirements for listing on a Regulated Market under MiFID.30
   27
           The Notifying Parties submit that listing services for bonds cannot be segmented according to the
           currency denomination of the securities (Euro/non-Euro). Indeed, from the demand side, the issuer's
           choice depends in general on the particular financing requirements and target investors in every
           individual case of a listing and an issuer may issue bonds in more than one currency. In any event,
           market shares have been provided also for this possible market definition.
   28
           Scoach Schweiz AG, a 100% subsidiary of Scoach Holding S.A., operates a Regulated Market for
           structured products in Switzerland. DB owns a controlling interest (50% + 1 share) in Scoach Holding
           S.A., of which Six Swiss Exchange AG holds the remaining shares.
   29
           Cap is short for capitalisation; a measure by which a company's size can be classified.
   30
           According to the Notifying Parties, admission to trading in Entry Standard can be considered as a listing
           service because it is often used for capital raisings and inclusion requires the consent of the issuing
           company. In contrast, the Notifying Parties submit that admission to trading in Open Market, another
           DB MTF, cannot be considered a listing service, but rather a service ancillary to trading, because: (i) it
           takes place at the request of a trading member; (ii) the request and the consent of the issuing company
           (unless the issuing company is itself a trading member) is not necessary; and (iii) it does not in general
           take place in the context of capital raising.
EN                                                        11                                                          EN

        In 2010, DB generated total cash listing revenues of about EUR […]*, accounting for
        about […]*% of DB’s overall revenues.
   (48) In the EEA, NYX operates (i) Euronext Regulated Markets, comprising the exchanges
        in Amsterdam, Brussels, Lisbon, and Paris, along with a new venue for international
        listing in London31, and (ii) NYSE Alternext, comprising the MTFs in Amsterdam,
        Brussels, Lisbon, and Paris, providing admission to trading for small and mid-cap
        companies not listed within the meaning of MiFID32. In the US, NYX operates (i) the
        New York Stock Exchange, NYX's largest listing venue for all cash instruments; (ii)
        NYSE Amex Equities, a listing venue for emerging growth companies; and (iii) NYSE
        Arca, providing listing for ETFs and other ETPs33. In 2010, NYX generated total cash
        listing revenues of about EUR […]* from its European markets, accounting for about
        […]*% of NYX’s overall revenues.
   (49) In the market segments where the demand for cash listing services is subject to "home
        bias" and the geographic scope of the market tends to be national (namely domestic
        (overall) equity listing, domestic listing of company-issued equities, listing of ETPs and
        listing of structured products as well as government bond listing), the Notifying Parties'
        activities do not overlap, since they are active in different Member States. NYX had, in
        2010, a market share of approximately [90-100%]* in Belgium, France, Portugal and
        the Netherlands in any possible product market segments, while DB is only active in
        Germany34. The merger will not have any effect on these markets and therefore the
        notified transaction does not raise any competition concern.
   (50) With regard to the market segments not subject to "home bias" (namely international
        company-issued equity listing and corporate bond listing), in a EEA-wide market, the
        Notifying Parties' combined market share would be [10-20%]* for international
        company-issued equity listing and [5-10%]* for corporate bond listing35. Both these
        markets appear to be characterised by the presence of strong competitors. In particular,
        in the market for international company-issued equity listing, the London Stock
        Exchange ("LSE") has a market share of [40-50%]* and the Luxembourg Stock
   31
          As of January 2012, no company had listed on this venue.
   32
          NYX also operates two separate Free Markets (Marché Libre), MTFs for small and mid-cap issuing
          companies in Paris and Brussels. Generally, companies are included to trade on these platforms without
          any raising of capital and, whilst in Paris '[l]a première négociation d'une valeur sur le Marché Libre
          s'effectue à l'initiative et sous la responsabilité d'un membre des marchés réglementés de titres gérés
          par NYSE Euronext'; in Brussels the admission occurs upon request of the issuer (NYX Euronext
          website).
   33
          Issuing companies can list initially on NYSE Arca and then transfer the listing to NYX once they meet
          the listing requirements.
   34
          In the Union, and within a given Member State, there is typically only one national exchange, with the
          exception of Spain (where all the regional exchanges are, nonetheless, part of the BME Spanish
          Exchanges group, "BME") and Germany. In Germany, largely for historical reasons, there are several
          active regional exchanges, namely the Stuttgart Börse, the Düsseldorf Börse, the Hannover Börse, the
          Berlin Börse, the München Börse and the Hamburger Börse. These German regional exchanges are not
          controlled by DB. DB and Stuttgart Börse have respectively [50-60]*% and [40-50]*% of market share
          in domestic (overall) equity listing. In 2010, about [90-100]*% and [90-100]*% of domestic equity
          listings on, respectively, DB and Börse Stuttgart concerned structured products.
   35
          The Notifying Parties submit that it is difficult to distinguish between large corporate and small
          corporate bond issuers on a non-arbitrary basis. In any event, they submit that their combined market
          share would, under any possible market definition, be below 15%.
EN                                                         12                                                     EN

          Exchange ("Luxembourg SE") a [20-30%]* market share. Moreover, the Commission
          considers, in particular on the basis of the market investigation, that the choice of the
          listing venue depends also on several elements not influenced by the exchanges, such as
          the issuers' business strategies and targeted investors. Such constraining factors would
          also be relevant in the alternative geographic market definitions (which the Commission
          considers less plausible on the basis of the market investigation), where the Notifying
          Parties' combined market share would be somewhat higher, although still not at a level
          likely to cause concern36.
   (51) It should also be noted that within the EEA, only Regulated Markets under MiFID have
          been considered as relevant providers of cash listing services. Nonetheless, if the cash
          listing markets were to be considered to include also admission to trading services
          provided by MTFs, the Notifying Parties' combined market presence would be further
          constrained by another competitive presence.
   (52) Therefore, the notified transaction does not raise any competition concerns in the cash
          listing markets not subject to "home bias". Moreover, the Commission notes that no
          significant concerns with specific regard to listing services in general have been raised
          by the respondents in the context of the market investigation.
       7.1.2.2. VERTICAL RELATIONSHIP
   (53) MIFID, since it became applicable within the EEA, has brought about significant
          changes in the structure of cash markets. Traditionally, a cash security had to be listed
          for it to be traded on a given exchange. Therefore, a vertical link between cash listing
          and cash trading could be established.
   (54) Post-MiFID, securities can be admitted to trading on Regulated Markets/MTFs regardless
          of the venue on which they are listed. Moreover, trading on MTFs does not require prior
          listing of the securities on a Regulated Market. As a consequence, competition between
          Regulated Markets and/or MTFs takes place separately at listing and admission to
          trading levels, and the vertical link between listing and trading no longer appears to be
          relevant.
     7.2. CASH TRADING SERVICES
   (55) DB and NYX both provide trading services for all main categories of cash instruments37
          including company-issued equity, ETPs, structured products and bonds.
   (56) In Germany, DB operates the FWB, an entity under public law, with its equity trading
          platform Xetra which offers a variety of trading models such as open order book models or
          specialist auction models and provides trading services for company issued equity, ETPs
          and structured products. Furthermore, as mentioned in Recital (11)38, DB owns, together
   36
            Respectively [20-30%] in a world-wide market and [30-40%] in an EU+US wide market. In the latter,
            LSE would have a market share of [20-30%], followed by Nasdaq OMX with [10-20%] and the
            Luxembourg SE with [10-20%].
   37
            NYX is, however, not active in trading Repos ("repos" are transactions involving the sale of a bond
            together with a commitment to repurchase it at a higher price in the future).
   38
            See Recital (11) of this Decision.
EN                                                          13                                                  EN

         with SIX Swiss Exchange AG Eurex Zürich AG39, the parent company of Eurex Frankfurt
         AG ("Eurex") which controls Eurex Clearing AG and the repo trading platform Eurex
         Repo GmbH. Eurex also has a majority shareholding in Eurex Bonds GmbH, an electronic
         trading platform for fixed income securities 40.
   (57) In Europe, NYX operates the cash trading platform Euronext for the exchanges in
         Amsterdam, Paris, Brussels and Lisbon; NYSE Alternext - comprising four MTFs for the
         same locations; and the pan-European MTFs of NYSE Arca Europe and Smart pool,
         which was created in partnership with three investment banks41. In the US, NYX operates
         the New York Stock Exchange, NYSE Amex Equities and NYSE Arca.
   (58) In contrast to NYX, DB also provides post-trading services for cash instruments, namely
         clearing services via Eurex and settlement via its subsidiary Clearstream.
      7.2.1.     Market definition
              7.2.1.1. TRADING
   (59) Cash trading is the buying and selling of cash instruments which occurs in a number of
          ways through a variety of venues. Under MiFID, in the EEA, cash instruments can be
          traded on Regulated Markets, MTFs42, and OTC.
   (60) One key distinction between cash trading and derivatives trading should be noted: whereas
          in derivatives, the contracts traded on exchange are created by the exchanges themselves
          and differ from the more customised or bilaterally negotiated OTC contracts, in cash
          trading it is always the same instrument which is traded, regardless of the trading venue. In
          other words, it is always the same stock or the same bond which is bought or sold on
          Regulated Markets, MTFs or OTC.
   (61) The Notifying Parties submit that there are separate relevant product markets for the
          trading of equities and the trading of bonds. This is in line with previous Commission
          decisions43 and has been confirmed by the results of the market investigation.
   39
            See footnote 8 of this Decision.
   40
            Eurex holds over 70% in Eurex Bonds GmbH (the remaining shares are held by Royal Bank of
            Scotland N.V.; Barclays Bank Plc; UniCredit Bank AG; BNP Paribas SA; Commerzbank AG; Credit
            Suisse AG; Deutsche Bank AG; Morgan Stanley Fixed Income Ventures Inc.; WestLB AG).
   41
            BNP Paribas, HSBC and JP Morgan.
   42
            Cash instruments can be also traded on Systemic Internalisers ("SI"). According to Article 4 (7) of
            MiFID, an SI is "an investment firm which, on an organised, frequent and systematic basis, deals on
            own account by executing client orders outside a regulated market or an MTF." An SI acts as both an
            agent and a counterparty for every trade or, in other words, as a buyer to a customer's selling and as a
            seller to a customer's buying order. Although brokers avoid through internalisation trading and post-
            trading costs, they are also subject to MiFID regarding obligations such as record-keeping and pre-trade
            transparency.
   43
            See, before MiFID, Case No COMP/M.3511 Wiener Börse et al./Budapest Stock Exchange/Budapest
            Commodity Exchange/Keler/JV, and post-MiFID Case No COMP/M.5495 UniCredit/Banca IMI/Euro
            TLX SIM JV.
EN                                                         14                                                        EN

   7.2.1.1.1.       Equity trading
                            7.2.1.1.1.1.      Product market definition
                                 7.2.1.1.1.1.1.      Trading on Regulated Markets and MTFs vs
                                     OTC trading
   (62) The Notifying Parties submit that all equity types listed in a particular country belong to
         one relevant product market regardless of whether they are traded on Regulated Markets,
         MTFs or OTC.
   (63) As regards trading venues, the Commission, when considering company-issued equity in
         previous decisions, indicated a single market for Regulated Markets and MTFs but
         distinguished those from OTC trading because of their different characteristics44. This
         distinction still applies: whereas, the Commission considers, on the basis of the market
         investigation, that MTFs since MiFID have become a realistic competitive alternative to
         Regulated Markets, this does not seem to be the case for OTC trading. The decision for
         OTC appears to be determined by factors such as the size of the deal, specific client
         requirements and liquidity considerations. For instance, a number of customers responded
         that they prefer equity trading on Regulated Markets or MTFs, but may go for OTC if
         there is insufficient liquidity on exchange. Other customers responded that they principally
         prefer OTC to avoid market impact on exchange of large size deals. Thus, the decision for
         OTC or Regulated Markets/MTFs is generally determined by external factors.
   (64) Therefore, the Commission in this Decision bases its assessment on a separate product
         market for equity trading on regulated markets and MTFs excluding OTC trading.
         Ultimately, however, the exact product market definition in this respect can be left open
         since the notified transaction does not result in competition concerns irrespective of the
         issue of whether or not OTC trading is included.
                                 7.2.1.1.1.1.2.      The different types of equity
   (65) The Notifying Parties further submit that all equities belong to the same relevant product
         market and that there is no need to distinguish company-issued equity, ETPs and
         structured products (including warrants and certificates) as different segments. The reason
         for this broad definition is, according to the Notifying Parties, that all equities are traded in
         the same manner and that all trades are based on investors' needs as regards, for instance,
         liquidity and price, the characteristics of the equity and the expected return on investment.
   (66) However, from the demand side perspective, there seems to be limited substitutability
         between the different categories of equity products. Thus, stocks differ quite significantly
         from ETPs which primarily comprise Exchange Traded Funds ("ETFs": open ended
         investment funds that aim to track the performance of underlying indices across all asset
         classes) but also Exchange Traded Commodities and Vehicles (tracking the performance
   44
           See cases mentioned in the footnote above; the different characteristics refer to, for instance, the
           different sizes of exchange and OTC transactions, the irregularity of OTC trading and other criteria
           defined in MiFID.
EN                                                    15                                                        EN

        of an underlying single or index commodity such as metals or energy) and Exchange
        Traded Notes (tracking the performance of indices and asset classes such as currencies).
        Both ETPs and stocks also differ from structured products that are based on different
        underlyings such as stocks, indices or currencies but offer a return that is fixed at issuance.
   (67) The results of the market investigation highlighted that stocks, ETPs and structured
        products differ in many respects, namely in the risk profile, the legal ownership profile, the
        regulatory and the tax regimes, the intra-day liquidity and the counterparty risks. In
        addition, the different underlyings of some equities, such as ETPs or structured products,
        play a role in determining whether or not the instruments have leverage or bear credit risk.
        Consequently, the majority of customers replying to the Phase 1 market investigation
        stated that the three equity categories – company issued equity, ETPs and structured
        products – are not substitutable for each other and that each category should be considered
        separately.
   (68) There are some indications that different equity types may be substitutable from the
        perspective of the supply side. Thus, most of the platform operators seem to offer trading
        services for all equity categories, and some respondents to the market investigation
        indicated that it would not require significant time or cost to start offering a trading service
        for an equity category which they currently do not offer. Nevertheless, a platform provider
        would not start offering a trading service for a new equity type, however easy it may be, if
        it does not make economic sense, for instance, because it would be difficult to attract
        sufficient liquidity. As regards ETFs, accounting for the significant majority of ETPs,
        there is already less liquidity on trading venues in the Union than in the US due to the
        current regulatory framework45. As a consequence, a large part of the ETF trading in the
        Union is executed OTC. MTFs have not been very active trading venues for ETFs
        although they can easily offer ETF trading on their platforms. Thus, the competition
        conditions appear to differ for the three equity types. This is further underpinned in
        Recitals (70) and (77) when discussing whether trading in equities listed in different
        countries form one or separate product markets because the trading conditions also differ
        between the equity types in this respect.
   (69) Therefore, the Commission will base its assessment in this Decision on separate product
        markets for the three equity categories - company-issued equity, ETPs and structured
        products.
                               7.2.1.1.1.1.3.            The "home bias" of equity trading
   (70) The Notifying Parties submit that equities listed in a particular Member State belong to one
        relevant product market since these are substitutable for each other whereas they are not
        substitutable for equities listed in other countries. Accordingly, this "home-bias" applies to
        demand and supply-side substitutability since investors primarily trade in domestic
        equities – also on MTFs – and exchanges and platforms are still more successful when
        offering trading services of domestic equities.
   45
          The lack of reporting obligations for ETFs in comparison to company issued equity leads to a lack of
          transparency which in turn reduces the ability of trading venues to offer high liquidity on their platforms.
EN                                                         16                                                          EN

   (71) The Commission has not concluded on this issue in previous decisions46 and the market
        investigation has only partially confirmed the Notifying Parties' view.
   (72) With respect to company-issued equity, around half of the customers replying to the Phase
        1 market investigation stated that trading in stocks listed in one Member State is not
        substitutable for trading in stocks listed in other Member States, whereas, broadly
        speaking, the other half saw substitutability between stocks listed in different countries.
        However, around a third of the latter saw substitutability only for trading blue chips listed
        in different countries. In any event, the exact market definition in this respect can be left
        open since the notified transaction does not raise concerns under both alternatives -
        whether company-issued equities independent of their listing origin or only those with a
        primary listing in a particular country are included in the relevant product market.
   (73) As to ETPs, the result of the market investigation regarding substitutability with respect to
        the listing location was also mixed. In that context, the following should be noted: the
        most popular ETP-types with investors, including retail investors, are ETFs which account
        for roughly 90%47 of all ETPs. Therefore, market data, statistics, studies and comments of
        market participants on ETPs often focus on ETFs48. As a consequence, the Commission
        will also base its assessment mainly on ETFs.
   (74) ETFs are very often listed on several exchanges in addition to their "primary listing". This
        multiple listing can be explained by the attractiveness of certain ETFs - for instance,
        popular index-based ETFs such as DAX or CAC-tracking ETFs - with a broader set of
        risks than company-issued equities - also outside the country of the primary listing venue.
        Investors in these other countries, in particular retail but also a number of (small and
        medium sized) institutional investors, tend to require an additional listing on the local
        market due to, for instance, regulatory reasons or simply because they only trade locally.
        According to the information of the Notifying Parties, an issuer that, for instance, wants to
        directly contact investors in France, must first have the product listed on a Regulated
        Market. Finally, there is not much cross-border activity in ETF trading since buying in one
        country and selling in another would result in additional post-trading costs and is,
        therefore not attractive, at least not for retail and smaller investors. Issuers accommodate
        these requirements although the multiple listing fragments liquidity.
   (75) This multiple listing of ETFs does not imply that there is no home-bias at all since ETF
        investors still tend to focus on trades in domestic ETFs, and, consequently, there is more
        liquidity on the primary listing venue. However, it results in the fact that the description
        "listed in a particular Member State" does not accurately reflect reality in disregarding the
        multiple listing of widely popular ETFs that, however, account for significant trade
        volumes. Similarly, the reference to "ETFs with a primary listing in one particular
        Member State" can distort the assessment, at least when assuming Union-wide markets,
        since this ignores the reasons for multiple listings (see Recital (79)).
   46
          See cases mentioned in footnote 43.
   47
          According to the information of the Notifying Parties based on Deutsche Bank, Global Markets
          Research, Global Equity Index &ETF Research, European Weekly ETP Review, February 11, 2011.
   48
          It should be noted that the Notifying Parties also base their calculations of ETP market shares on ETF
          data.
EN                                                      17                                                       EN

   (76) Thus, there are strong indications that the relevant market encompasses not only the
         trading of ETFs with a primary listing in one particular Member State but also the trading
         of ETFs with other primary listing locations. Ultimately, however, the exact product
         market definition can be left open since no competition problems arise under any of the
         alternatives.
   (77) With respect to structured products including warrants and certificates, the majority of
         customers replying to the Phase 1 market investigation stated that trading in structured
         products that are listed in different countries is not substitutable. This is underlined by
         some further statements of respondents indicating that structured products are in particular
         "structured" for specific customer needs which confirms the Notifying Parties' explanation
         that structured products are designed specifically for domestic investors and are rarely
         traded in countries where they are not listed. Therefore, the Commission bases its
         assessment on a product market that comprises structured products listed in a particular
         country.
                          7.2.1.1.1.2.      Geographic market definition
   (78) As regards the geographic market definition, the Notifying Parties submit that the markets
         for trading equities (listed in a particular Member State) are at least EEA-wide and provide
         market share calculations on EEA-wide basis. As mentioned in Recitals (33) to (36),
         listing and trading have been separated since MiFID and equities can be traded in a
         European-wide market (it being always the same stock which is traded regardless of the
         geographic scope of the market). Therefore, the Commission has in principle no reasons to
         object to the definition of EEA wide equity markets.
   (79) There is, however, one exception: the multiple listing of at least certain (popular) ETFs
         described above (see Recital (74)) shows that trading and listing is de facto not really
         separated in this respect since retail but also some institutional investors outside the
         primary listing location require an additional listing on their domestic trading venues. The
         listing and trading of, for instance, a DAX-based ETF in Frankfurt and Paris does,
         however, not imply that the exchanges in Frankfurt and Paris compete for the trades. It
         only indicates the reach of the ETF issuer for customers outside the location of the primary
         listing as was confirmed by the respondents to the market investigation and by interviews
         the Commission conducted in this respect.
   (80) Therefore, in the case of ETFs, there are strong indications for the existence of national
         markets. Finally however, the exact scope of the geographic market(s) for trading ETFs
         can be left open since no competition concerns arise under any alternative definition.
   7.2.1.1.2.      Bonds trading
                          7.2.1.1.2.1.      Product market definition
   (81) Only a small fraction of bonds are traded on-exchange. The Notifying Parties estimate that
         at least 90% of bond trading is carried out OTC and the importance of OTC trading has
EN                                                    18                                              EN

         been confirmed by the results of the market investigation49. The Notifying Parties submit
         that OTC - including internalisation - is the main competitive constraint for exchanges. As
         indicated in Recital (59) above for cash instruments in general, it should be noted that, as
         opposed to what occurs in derivatives trading, the same bonds are traded both OTC and
         on-exchange.
   (82) As regards trading on MTFs, the Notifying Parties submit that MiFID transparency
         requirements do not differ between types of trading venues or types of bonds traded (in
         contrast to company issued equities). In general, they estimate that MTFs have probably
         captured a similar fraction of bond trading as Regulated Markets50.
   (83) Furthermore, the Notifying Parties state that different types of bonds (corporate vs.
         government) or the issuing country should not be distinguished for market definition
         purposes since other characteristics such as maturity date, rating or the rate of return are
         more important for investors than the above-mentioned criteria. However, the exact
         product market definition can be left open because the assessment would not change under
         any of the alternative definitions.
                            7.2.1.1.2.2.       Geographic market definition
   (84) As regards the geographic market definition, the Notifying Parties submit that the relevant
         geographic market is at least EEA-wide since investors residing in a specific country also
         use trading venues in other countries. The Commission agrees with that definition for the
         purpose of this Decision. In any event, should the markets be defined nationally, there
         would be no overlap between the Notifying Parties' activities regarding bonds.
             7.2.1.2. POST-TRADING
   (85) Post-trading services refers to two main services, namely clearing and settlement services.
   7.2.1.2.1.      Clearing of cash instruments
                            7.2.1.2.1.1.       Product market definition
   (86) Clearing is a process in a financial transaction that can take place after a trade is executed
         but before settlement. Its purpose is to manage the counterparty risk in this interim period,
         to ensure that all trades are settled even if a buyer or seller defaults or becomes insolvent
         prior to settlement. This service is provided by a Central Counterparty ("CCP"), which is
         interposed between the trading parties. The decision on clearing is controlled by the
         trading venues, which choose the CCP(s), but the trading firms pay the CCPs for the
         clearing service.
   49
           The majority of liquidity in the European bond market is still in the OTC market. Although some
           respondents stated that they would prefer to trade on Regulated Markets and/or MTFs, they also
           confirmed that this was conditional on finding sufficient liquidity which, for bonds, is very often not the
           case.
   50
           The Notifying Parties submit that no separate statistics on MTF trading are available for bonds.
EN                                                       19                                                            EN

   (87) The Notifying Parties submit that there is a separate relevant market for the provision of
         clearing services, in particular because of the existence of competition between CCPs to
         provide clearing services to cash trading venues as the trading venue selects the CCP(s).
         They moreover submit that there is a separate market for the clearing of cash
         instruments.
   (88) In the Commission's view, however, and from the customer perspective, cash clearing
         services could be considered as part of an overall service provided by an exchange with
         regard to a particular security, as it is the case for derivatives51. Taking into account the
         market investigation, the Commission considers that, when a trader decides to execute a
         trade on a certain venue, the clearing service is normally not decisive for cash instruments
         and that what is considered decisive is rather the total cost of trading (including clearing
         and settlement).
   (89) In any event, the question can be left open since competition concerns do not arise even if
         the assessment is based on a separate potential market for the provision of cash clearing
         services to third party trading venues and platforms.
                             7.2.1.2.1.2.         Geographic market definition
   (90) As to the geographic market definition, the Notifying Parties submit that the market for
         cash clearing services is at least EEA-wide since many CCPs are active throughout
         Europe. Exchanges and MTFs cross national boundaries and, for instance, clear their
         trades with non-domestic CCPs. However, and in agreement with the Notifying Parties,
         the exact geographic definition can be left open, since competition concerns do not arise
         under any alternative market definition.
   7.2.1.2.2.        Settlement of cash instruments
                             7.2.1.2.2.1.         Product market definition
   (91) Settlement is the process by which a security traded by a seller is delivered to the purchaser
         in exchange for payment. Settlement therefore fulfils the buyer's and seller's contractual
         obligations with respect to a trade. This service is provided by the relevant national Central
         Securities Depositories ("CSDs")52 or, in some cases, by intermediaries (such as brokers).
   (92) In previous decisions, the Commission has considered the distinction between primary and
         secondary settlement services53. Primary settlement is performed by the national CSD,
         where the relevant securities reside and, as such, the settlement of a trade can be
         completely implemented by the CSD. In the Judgment Clearstream Banking AG and
         Clearstream International v Commission54, the Court of First Instance accepted that
   51
           While from the perspective of a trader one service of cash trading and clearing is generally provided, as
           is the case with derivatives, there is a separate market for the provision of cash clearing services to third
           party venues and OTC trading platforms. However, this market is not affected by the present transaction
           since NYX is not active in the provision of cash instruments clearing services to third parties.
   52
           In general each country has only one CSD.
   53
           See Case No COMP/38.096, Clearstream, and Case No COMP/M.3511, Wiener Börse/BSE/BCE/Keler.
   54
           T-301/04, ECR II-3155, paras. 57ff.
EN                                                          20                                                           EN

        there is a distinct market in the provision of primary clearing and settlement services in
        respect of securities issued in Germany (where there is a national CSD), separate from
        the market in secondary services, given that, because an undertaking holds a de facto
        monopoly on that market and is therefore an indispensable commercial partner for those
        primary services, there is neither demand-side nor supply-side substitutability for those
        services.
   (93) According to the Notifying Parties, for instance, settlement providers for equity trades on
        Regulated Markets do not generally compete and the settlement services for these trades
        are almost always provided by the national CSD. Secondary settlement is provided by
        intermediaries that hold securities with the CSD in their name but on behalf of customers.
        These providers can settle in-house transactions occurring between their customers
        without involving action at the CSD level. According to the Notifying Parties, secondary
        settlement may be more likely where trades are completed OTC.
   (94) The Notifying Parties submit that the precise definition of the product market can be left
        open as the notified transaction will not result in competition concerns regardless of the
        definition. The Commission, in view of the existing regulation for national CSDs as to
        primary settlement, will assess the impact of the notified transaction on settlement services
        nevertheless on the basis of separate markets for primary and secondary settlement.
        Finally, however, the Commission agrees with the Notifying Parties that the exact product
        market definition can be left open since the assessment would not alter under any
        definition.
                            7.2.1.2.2.2.      Geographic definition
   (95) The Notifying Parties submit that the market for secondary settlement services - and
        likewise a potential overall settlement service market – is at least EEA-wide since these
        services can be provided by intermediaries anywhere in the world.
   (96) As to primary settlement, the Commission in previous decisions left the geographic market
        definition open55. It also explained that securities issued and settled in a particular
        Member State will anyway be kept in final custody in that Member State. Therefore,
        there is practically no competition between different national CSDs for deposit, final
        custody and primary settlement56. As a consequence, the competitive assessment is the
        same regardless of the precise geographic definition of the relevant market. Since the
        role of national CSDs has not changed in any significant way despite the regulatory
        changes introduced by MiFID57, the Commission will follow also this line in this
        Decision.
   55
          Case No COMP/M.3511 Wiener Börse et al./Budapest Stock Exchange/Budapest Commodity
          Exchange/Keler/JV.
   56
          See Case No COMP/38.096, Clearstream.
   57
          This was recognised by the Commission in the context of its MiFID review when it stated that regulatory
          barriers have not yet been fully removed regarding cross-border post-trading services performed also by
          CSDs. (See Press Release, Enhancing safety of European financial markets: common rules for Central
          Securities Depositories (CSDs) and securities settlement, January 13, 2011, available at
          http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/11/29&format=HTML&aged=0&language
          =EN&guiLanguage=en ).
EN                                                     21                                                         EN

   (97) As to secondary settlement, the exact geographic definition can be also left open since the
          notified transaction does not result in competition concerns regardless of the definition.
      7.2.2.    Competitive assessment
   (98) The envisaged merger does not raise competition concerns with respect to cash trading and
          post-trading services. The Commission's assessment was confirmed by the market
          investigation despite some critical remarks received regarding post-trading services, in
          particular with respect to settlement services.
              7.2.2.1. EQUITY TRADING
   (99) The market for equity trading has dramatically changed, in particular regarding
          company-issued equities, since MiFID entered into force in 2007 and abolished the
          concentration rule, which required that trading be undertaken only on the trading venue of
          the listing. As a result new competitors – the MTFs – emerged, changing the market
          structures and, as a consequence of these dynamics, bringing down trading costs.
   7.2.2.1.1.       Company-issued equities (stocks)
   (100) With respect to EEA-wide traded company-issued equity listed in a particular Member
          State, the Notifying Parties have no overlaps – for stocks listed in Germany and Portugal -
          or negligible overlaps (below 0.5 % increment for stocks listed in France, the Netherlands
          and Belgium). According to the Notifying Parties, the strongest competitor of the
          respective incumbent is Chi-X Europe with market shares between 20% and 30% for
          stocks listed in Germany, France and Belgium and the Netherlands in value terms and also
          between 20-30% in volume terms (except for trading of stocks listed in Germany where
          Chi-X Europe according to the Notifying Parties achieves a market share in the range of
          30-40% in value terms). Chi-X Europe as the strongest competitor for stocks listed in each
          of these countries is generally followed by BATS58 and the London Stock Exchange
          ("LSE") with market shares in the range of 5-10% or even 10-15% on the listing location
          and whether measured in value or volume terms.59 In that context, it should be noted that
          BATS has recently acquired Chi-X Europe.
   (101) On the basis of EEA-wide stock trading independent of the listing location, post-merger,
          DB and NYX would achieve a combined market share of [20-30%]* in value terms and of
          [20-30%]* in volume terms, followed by Chi-X Europe in volume terms (20-30% with
          LSE also achieving a share within that range) and LSE in value terms (20-30%, with Chi-
          X Europe achieving 10-20%) and BATs with [5-10%]* and [10-20%]* in value and
          volume terms respectively. As outlined in Recital (72) in the context of market definition,
          there is, however, still a "home-bias" for stocks so that EEA-wide market shares
          independent of the listing country may not properly reflect the real picture.
   (102) However, the Commission's analysis – whether based on EEA-wide trading of stocks of
          listed in a particular Member State or on trading of stocks listed anywhere in the EEA –
          clearly shows that the MTFs, in particular Chi-X Europe and BATS, have not only
          managed to become viable competitors but also to strongly increase their market shares at
   58
            See BATS' website, available at http://www.batsglobalmarkets.com/, (January 2012).
   59
            Market share estimates for 2010 (excluding OTC, on book) provided by the Notifying Parties.
EN                                                      22                                              EN

         the cost of the former incumbents, including DB and NYX, which has caused significant
         market dynamics and increased competition.
   (103) This assessment has been widely confirmed by the results of the market investigation
         which revealed a general appreciation of MiFID and the emergence of MTFs. Although
         many customers focused on blue chip companies when characterising MTFs as a
         particularly viable substitute for stock trading - and not on equities issued by small and
         mid-cap firms - it was also acknowledged that MTFs are in a position to compete with
         exchanges for all types of trading. In general, the market investigation did not reveal any
         particular concerns in the field of stock trading.
   (104) The Commission has also not found evidence that the competitive constraint that MTFs
         currently represent will be significantly reduced by the possible extension of DB's
         vertical silo model for clearing to the merged entity. This is so, in particular as barriers
         to entry are lower in the equity market than in the derivatives market due to the lower
         importance of netting and cross-margining at clearing. As described in Recital (86), the
         purpose of clearing is to manage the counterparty risk in the interim period between
         trading and settlement. For cash instruments, there are normally only two or three days
         between trading and delivery-versus-payment, whereas for derivatives, the counterparty
         risk needs to be managed throughout the lifetime of the derivatives contract which could
         be several months or years. In this regard, it has been observed, and the market
         investigation has confirmed, that successful entry by MTFs in equity trading has occurred
         without the need to obtain access to the clearing facilities of the incumbent exchanges, as
         MTFs have resorted to other clearing-houses such as EMCF and LCH.Clearnet.
   7.2.2.1.2.      Structured products
   (105) As mentioned in Recital (77), structured products are designed for specific customer needs
         that vary from Member State to Member State. Consequently, structured products listed in
         a particular country are specifically designed for domestic investors and do not seem to
         appeal to other investors, so that structured products are rarely traded in countries where
         they are not listed. Among all equity types, this "home bias" appears to be strongest for
         structured products as confirmed by the market investigation (see Recital (77)).
   (106) DB and NYX have no overlaps with respect to structured products listed in a particular
         Member State – it is either one or the other that offers the respective trading services
         Moreover, as to structured products listed in Germany, Stuttgarter Börse is much stronger
         than DB. The market investigation has not revealed any concerns regarding structured
         products.
   7.2.2.1.3.      ETFs
   (107) ETFs are mostly traded OTC or on Regulated Markets. Whereas large institutional
         investors tend to trade OTC, retail investors and also small to medium size institutional
         investors trade on Regulated Markets. MTFs have so far not attracted significant volumes
         or value of ETF trades. This can be explained by the limited and fragmented liquidity in
         ETFs and by the current regulatory framework, in particular by the lack of reporting
         obligations in comparison to company-issued equity, as several market participants
         mentioned in the context of the Commission's market investigation. The non-
         transparency of transactions and the liquidity problem currently seem to provide limited
EN                                                   23                                               EN

         incentives for investors to trade ETFs on MTFs. Whether this is going to change in the
         near future, as the Notifying Parties claim, is not clear, also according to most of the
         respondents to the market investigation.
   (108) On the basis of national markets - that appear to be the relevant markets from at least the
         viewpoint of retail and small to medium sized institutional investors that require local
         listings of ETFs independent of the primary listing – the activities of DB's and NYX's
         activities do not overlap.
   (109) Alternatively, on the hypothetical basis of an EEA-wide market for providing trading
         services for ETFs with a primary listing in a particular Member State, there are also no
         overlaps as regards ETFs with a primary listing in Belgium, Portugal and the Netherlands.
         This can be explained by the fact that the respective ETFs are apparently not traded
         outside their primary listing location, at least not to a measurable extent.
   (110) The picture is different with respect to a hypothetical EEA-wide trading of ETFs with a
         primary listing in Germany and France since popular ETFs with a primary listing in these
         Member States are also traded outside Germany and France. Thus, apart from the strong
         market position of the respective incumbent, overlaps seem to exist: as to ETFs with a
         primary listing in France, DB would, for instance, also be present (with a 'market share' of
         [10-20%]* in volume and value terms according to the Notifying Parties) as would be
         other exchanges such as LSE Group. Similarly, as regards ETFs with a primary listing in
         Germany, NYX would be present (with a 'market share' of [5-10%]* in volume and value
         terms according to the Notifying Parties) as well as others such as LSE Group and, to a
         very limited extend, MTFs.
   (111) However, as already explained in the context of market definition, these 'overlaps' do not
         accurately reflect reality. They are caused by the multiple local listing of popular ETFs - as
         required by retail and smaller institutional investors that want to trade these ETFs
         domestically, also for regulatory reasons - but do not result from competition between the
         exchanges. Only very few large institutional investors may choose between the different
         trading venues. However, this effect is extremely limited since these investors mostly trade
         OTC for liquidity reasons. This was also confirmed by the market investigation which,
         moreover, did not reveal concerns with respect to competition in the field of ETF trading.
   (112) Therefore, the notified transaction does not raise competition concerns with respect to ETF
         trading.
   7.2.2.1.4.      Conclusion
   (113) As a consequence, it is concluded that the notified transaction does not raise competition
         concerns as regards equity trading.
             7.2.2.2. BOND TRADING
   (114) The Notifying Parties are not strong players in bond trading. This was confirmed by the
         market investigation.
EN                                                   24                                                 EN

   (115) The Notifying Parties would achieve low combined market shares (0-5% according to
         their own estimates) under various alternative product market definitions with a European
         geographic scope60. There is one exception, where the Notifying Parties would achieve
         somewhat higher combined shares, at least if based on volume (number of trades), namely
         a hypothetical market for European bond trading carried out on Regulated Markets only
         (excluding trading on MTFs). Under this market definition, the Notifying Parties would
         achieve, according to their own estimates, a share that is still under [0-5%]* in value terms
         but [20-30%]* in volume terms. This can be explained by the fact that the Notifying
         Parties mostly attract small trades. In contrast, LSE and in particular Bolsas y Mercados
         Españoles ("BME"), seem to attract larger trades on Regulated Markets and achieve,
         according to the Notifying Parties, estimated market shares of [20-30%]* (LSE) and [60-
         70%]* (BME) in value terms and [50-60]*% (LSE) and [10-20]*% (BME) in volume
         terms. Therefore, even on the basis of such a narrow product market definition, the
         Notifying Parties are not leading players. On the basis of national markets, the Notifying
         Parties' activities would not overlap. The market investigation did not reveal any concerns
         in bond trading.
   (116) Therefore, competition concerns do not arise with respect to bond trading.
             7.2.2.3. POST-TRADING: CLEARING
   (117) As described in Recital (58), NYX is not active in the provision of cash clearing; therefore
         there are no horizontally affected markets involving clearing services.
   (118) Regarding potential vertical effects, although some respondents in the market investigation
         expressed concerns regarding a possible strengthening of the vertical silo through the
         merger with respect to clearing, the Commission has not identified such merger-specific
         factors that could strengthen the vertical silo.
   (119) On the basis of the market investigation, the Commission considers that successful entry
         by MTFs in equity trading has occurred without the need to obtain access to the clearing
         facilities of the incumbent exchanges, as MTFs have resorted to other clearing-houses
         such as EMCF, EuroCCP and LCH.Clearnet.
   (120) The notified transaction does not, therefore, result in significant vertical effects in relation
         to equities trading and clearing.
             7.2.2.4. POST-TRADING: SETTLEMENT
   (121) The Notifying Parties' activities do not overlap in settlement, whether in secondary
         settlement, where NYX is not active, or in primary settlement.
   (122) NYX is only active in primary settlement through its subsidiary Interbolsa, the Portuguese
         CSD (settlement for NYX exchanges in Belgium, France, and the Netherlands are
   60
           If the assessment was based on domestic trading, there would be no overlap of activities.
EN                                                        25                                              EN

         provided by Euroclear), while DB, via Clearstream Holding AG, ("Clearstream")61, is
         active in primary settlement as CSD for German stocks and in secondary settlement.
   (123) DB, via Clearstream and its subsidiary Clearstream Banking SA, Luxembourg ("CBL"), is
         active also as an International Central Securities Depository (ICSD). An ICSD is a central
         securities depository that settles transactions in Eurobonds62. There are only two ICSDs
         globally: Clearstream and Euroclear. Both entities have a joint arrangement with so-called
         "Common Depositories" in multiple countries to allow them to move securities between
         clients in both organisations on a book-based basis. In addition to the ICSD functionality
         which only these two entities share, both Clearstream and Euroclear also provide
         secondary settlement services. NYX is not active as an ICSD.
   (124) Therefore, the notified transaction does not result in horizontal effects as regards
         settlement services.
   (125) As regards vertical effects, it should be recalled that primary settlement services are
         conducted by the national CSD of a given Member State, pursuant to national laws of
         the various Member States, for the securities issued in that particular Member State.
         Thus, there is no meaningful vertical relationship between NYX's cash trading activities
         and DB's primary settlement activities. Similarly, there is no meaningful vertical
         relationship between DB's cash trading activities and Interbolsa‘s primary settlement
         services. Therefore, the notified transaction does not result in vertical concerns with
         respect to primary settlement services.
   (126) As regards secondary settlement services, NYX‘s cash trading activities in Belgium,
         France, the Netherlands, and Portugal may be viewed as vertically related to DB‘s
         activities in secondary settlement. Post-transaction, the combined NYX/DB could
         potentially have the ability and incentive to direct trade flows from the NYX exchanges
         (via the clearing-house) to Clearstream for secondary settlement and, in the context of
         the market investigation, some concerns were indeed raised in this respect.
   (127) Since the provision of equities settlement depends on the availability of a feed from an
         exchange to CCPs and then to the relevant CSD, it was submitted that, as a result of the
         notified transaction, a "shift of activity at settlement level into the DBAG silo"63, more
         precisely the direction of trade flows or feed from the NYX exchanges to Clearstream
         without further involving the current settlement service provider (Euroclear), could be
         expected.
   (128) In this regard, it was further argued that in view of the strong position of a combined
         NYX/DB group, the merged entity would have the incentive to shift settlement into
         DB's vertical silo since doing so would, despite some possible cost savings, enhance its
         ability to raise the all-in costs of trading on Euronext towards the profit-maximising
         level. Therefore, if DB discontinued providing access to CSDs outside its group for
   61
           DB holds 100% of the shares of Clearstream, which in turn owns 100% of Clearstream Banking AG,
           Frankfurt ("CBF") CSD for securities issued under German law, and of Clearstream Banking S.A., an
           International Central Securities Depository (ICSD).
   62
           Eurobonds are also known as international debt securities, and are issued in several countries and are
           denominated in the currency in which they are issued.
   63
           See attachment to Euroclear's reply to questionnaire Q6 of 13 July 2011, Market Definition", paragraph
           5.10.2, [...]*.
EN                                                         26                                                     EN

         Euronext trades cleared through Eurex, and if it did not also provide external CSDs
         with simultaneous reciprocal access to German securities cleared through Eurex
         Clearing, competition would be greatly reduced 64.
   (129) The Commission, following its first phase market investigation, could therefore not
         exclude concerns with respect to a potential increase of the merged entity's ability and
         incentive to control transaction feeds and thereby foreclose competitors' access to an
         essential input. Consequently, the Commission further analysed the issue during the
         second phase.
   (130) The Notifying Parties submit that the notified transaction would not result in any anti-
         competitive foreclosure of competing settlement and custody service providers
         including Euroclear, and their ability to compete effectively.
   (131) First, the Notifying Parties state that, even under a worst case scenario where all
         Euronext trade volumes were shifted to Clearstream for secondary settlement, this
         would have no impact on its competitor's (Euroclear) ability to compete and engage in
         primary or secondary settlement services and a negligible impact on Euroclear's overall
         position. The effect of any shifts away from Euroclear in the market where it is the CSD
         would "represent only a small crack in Euroclear's own vertical silo"65. Secondly, since
         Euroclear would remain the custodian and primary settlement venue for France,
         Belgium, and the Netherlands, Clearstream might provide secondary settlement services
         to a CCP clearing Euronext trades only to the extent that it maintains an active custody
         and settlement account with the relevant Euroclear CSDs66. In general, settlement
         providers do not really compete and equity trades executed on Regulated Markets are
         almost always provided by the national CSD for all securities issued and deposited
         under national laws of the home country of a specific CSD, regardless of whether the
         CSD's customer is located domestically or abroad.
   (132) Moreover, the Notifying Parties submit that […]*, post-transaction and irrespective of
         clearing arrangements, the national Euroclear CSDs are likely to remain settlement
         locations for securities traded on NYX exchanges67.
   (133) The Commission, following an in-depth investigation of these issues, concludes that the
         notified transaction would not have any relevant impact on settlement services or more
         precisely, any foreclosure effects with respect to competing settlement service
         providers. The main reason is the continuing de facto monopoly position of national
         CSDs for custody and primary settlement service due to national regulations and
         requirements. Any potential diversion of settlement services away from national CSDs
         would, therefore, take place as secondary settlement through Clearstream. Even though
         this might add a new (secondary) settlement venue for French, Belgian and Dutch
         securities it would not remove the incumbent national CSD for custody and primary
   64
          Euroclear, submission of 21 June 2011, paragraph 9.15, [...]*.
   65
          Notifying Parties' submission of 25 August 2011 in response to the decision opening proceedings,
          paragraph 5.
   66
          Notifying Parties' submission of 25 August 2011 in response to the decision opening proceedings,
          paragraph 31.,
   67
          Notifying Parties' submission of 25 August 2011 in response to the decision opening proceedings,
          paragraph 6.
EN                                                     27                                                  EN

          settlement services. The possibility that Clearstream might be able to attract settlement
          for French, Belgian and Dutch securities and as a consequence shift some primary
          settlement services into secondary settlement is unlikely to result in market foreclosure,
          taking into account the volumes Euronext transaction feeds represent in comparison to
          the overall market and the settled transactions by strong primary settlers68.
   (134) Moreover, it is under the current environment highly unlikely that Clearstream would be
          able to move any significant volumes of settlement away from the CSD that
          concentrates settlement today. This can be explained by the current barriers - practical
          and regulatory - national differences in custody processing create and subsequent
          network effects.
   (135) Therefore, the notified transaction does not raise any competition concerns in relation to
          post-trading services including settlement.
   8.      MARKET DATA AND INDEX LICENSING
     8.1. MARKET DEFINITION
      8.1.1.     Market data
   (136) The provision of market data has developed into a stand-alone business activity as
         investment decisions are often based on detailed information. Market data are
         information products consisting of the current pricing or historical performance of
         particular assets, other data, and news. The Commission analysed this product area in
         two previous cases.
   (137) In Reuters/Telerate69, the Commission divided market data products into separate
          markets for: (i) the provision of real-time market data to end-users (“RTMD”); (ii) the
          supply of price and reference data to middle- and back-office functions; (iii) the supply
          of market data platforms; and (iv) the supply of foreign exchange order management
          software. While recognizing that the provision of RTMD could be further subdivided
          by reference to the type of asset, the Commission ultimately left the market definition
          open in this regard.
   (138) In Thomson/Reuters70, the Commission went further into the segmentation. More
          precisely, it found that individual content sets are not substitutable and therefore it
          identified various content sets as separate relevant product markets. Among these
   68
           According to the settled case law, it cannot be presumed that the law of the European Union will not be
           complied with by the merged entity. See paragraph 159 of the Judgment of the Court of first instance of
           25 October 2002 in the Tetra Laval BV v Commission case (T-5/02, ECR 2002 p. II-4381 where it is
            stated that, "although the Regulation [4064/89] provides for the prohibition of a merger creating or
            strengthening a dominant position which has significant anti-competitive effects, these conditions do
            not require it to be demonstrated that the merged entity will, as a result of the merger, engage in
            abusive, and consequently unlawful, conduct."
   69
            Case No. COMP/M.3692, Reuters/Telerate.
   70
            Case No. COMP/M.4726, Thomson /Reuters.
EN                                                        28                                                       EN

          segments, there are: (i) real-time data feeds71, (ii) market data platforms, (iii) other
          content sets.
   (139) In the current case, the Notifying Parties propose that when an exchange is a provider of
          market data, the following market data services should be distinguished: (i) the
          provision of proprietary trade-related information ("proprietary market data"), namely
          information generated on an exchange, such as real-time pricing and trading volume
          data, and for which that exchange is the sole provider; and (ii) the provision of non-
          proprietary market information ("non-proprietary market data"), namely general data
          not generated on a trading venue (such as data on macroeconomic variables such as
          GDP, unemployment, or inflation) and data resulting from further processing and/or
          aggregation of proprietary data originally generated on trading venues (such as
          "consolidated feed" products). According to the Notifying Parties, this distinction has
          not been considered by the Commission in its previous cases, where no exchange was
          involved and, therefore, only the market for non-proprietary market data was analysed.
   (140) The market investigation confirmed that the Notifying Parties each provide exchange-
          specific information that is not capable of being replicated by market data services
          provided by other exchanges or venues.
   (141) As regards the geographic market definition, in the decisions mentioned in Recitals
          (137) and (138), the Commission found that the markets for separate content-types were
          at least EEA-wide and probably world-wide in scope. The Notifying Parties agree with
          this definition with respect to the market for non-proprietary market data and they
          submit that the market for proprietary market data is world-wide.
   (142) In any event, the exact product and geographic market definition can be left open for the
          purpose of this Decision, since the notified transaction does not raise competition
          concerns under any possible market definition with regard to the horizontal effects of
          the notified transaction in market data.
      8.1.2.    Index Licensing
   (143) Market data may also be collated into indices, which are information products that
          measure changes in the value or performance of a group of investment products. Indices
          can be used as a source of information or as a benchmark against which to assess the
          performance of a given financial instrument. Indices can also fulfil an “underlying”
          function in which the index serves as a reference price for tradable investment products,
          such as ETFs and derivatives. To this end, an index provider creates and licenses
          branded indices and provides the composition and weighting data of the index to issuers
          of ETFs and structured products, as well as derivatives exchanges, and in some cases
          clearing-houses, which base their products or services on the index.
   71
           In Thomson /Reuters, although recognising the existence of two types of real-time datafeeds,
           consolidated real-time datafeeds and direct real-time datafeeds, and the existence of competition
           constraints exerted by direct real-time datafeeds on consolidated real-time datafeeds, the Commission
           did not take a final position as to whether consolidated and direct feeds were two separate markets or
           whether they belonged to a single product market.
EN                                                       29                                                       EN

   (144) The Notifying Parties argue that such activities are separate from the supply of indices
         as a form of market data: in particular, the customer groups for each service would be
         different and, even where customers both purchase index data and license an index for a
         tradable product, these are generally separate transactions. Accordingly, the Notifying
         Parties submit the existence of a separate market for index licensing, which would be
         global in scope.
   (145) Within this market, according to the Notifying Parties, it would not be appropriate to
         segment on the basis of different customer groups. Irrespective of this, market shares
         have been provided for any possible market definition in this respect.
   (146) The Notifying Parties also contend that a segmentation according to the type of index,
         namely between the various national equity indices and “pan-European” equity
         indices72 would not be relevant for market definition purposes, in particular because of
         the high degree of supply-side substitutability between different types of indices.
         Market shares have not been provided on this basis73. Only data on the Notifying
         Parties' turnover has been provided. Nevertheless, as highlighted in Section 10 on
         Derivatives, concerns were raised as regards the possible vertical link between index
         licensing and equity index derivative trading and clearing. These are analysed in that
         context in that Section.
   (147) The Commission's investigation has shown, however, that there is no supply-side
         substitution due to IP rights and that whilst a new index can indeed be launched in
         competition, on the licensing side, with other indices, the chance of such an index to
         obtain commercial success in competition with the indices traded on the platforms of
         the Notifying Parties would depend inter alia on the existence (or likely existence) of a
         liquid market in futures and options on that index. The investigation has also shown
         that indices based on baskets of stocks of different nationalities do not compete, but that
         there is competition in terms of licensing between indices based on a broad basket of
         European blue chip stocks, including between the Stoxx (including Eurostoxx) and
         Eurofirst families of indices.
   (148) It is therefore concluded for the purposes of this Decision that distinct relevant markets
         exist for the creation and licensing of indices composed of stocks from each of the
         national markets concerned, namely for German, Dutch, Belgian, Portuguese, French
         and UK stock indices. It is further concluded that a distinct relevant market exists for
         the creation and licensing of indices composed of a broad basket of stocks from a
         variety of EEA member states.
   (149) The Notifying Parties have argued that the geographic market for index licensing is
         global in scope74. However, it could also be argued that the market is only EEA-wide or
   72
           A "national index" is a share-based index representing the value of shares from a selected number of
           companies or investment products listed in a given Member States. A "pan-European index" is also a
           share-based index, but with a European wide selection of shares.
   73
           The Notifying Parties submit that they are unable to provide estimates of share data for separate product
           categories comprising national indices and pan-European indices. Given that the majority of index
           providers offer several indices (and in some cases even their entire index “family”) at a single price, the
           Notifying Parties are unable to reasonably estimate the proportions of the total licence fees paid that
           should be allocated between the multiple indices licensed by customers.
   74
           Form CO, section 6 on market data and indices, paragraph 6.84.
EN                                                       30                                                            EN

          even, as regards the national indices (or certain of them), national in scope. However,
          this point can be left open since, regardless of the conclusion on this point, the
          competitive analysis is the same.
     8.2. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
   (150) The Notifying Parties are active in the provision of market data and the licensing of
          indices.
      8.2.1.    Market data
   (151) The Notifying Parties' activities overlap in the provision of non-proprietary market
          data. When considering the segmentations identified by the Commission in
          Reuters/Telerate and Thomson/Reuters, the Notifying Parties' activities overlap,
          respectively in RTMD and in real-time data feeds, market data platforms and other
          content sets. In any event, under any possible market definition, the Notifying Parties'
          combined market share is below 15% on both an EEA-wide and world-wide basis.
          These markets are characterised by the presence of strong players such as Thomson
          Reuters and Bloomberg, and other competitors, such as SIX Telekurs and IDC.
          Therefore, the transaction does not raise competition concerns when considering
          horizontal overlaps. The market investigation has not shown concerns in this regard
          either.
   (152) As concerns proprietary market data, each Notifying Party is by definition the sole
          provider of the trade-related information generated on its own platforms. Therefore,
          there is no horizontal overlap between the Notifying Parties' activities and their
          proprietary data products should be considered as complementary.
   (153) The Notifying Parties supply proprietary market data directly to end users or to re-
          sellers/suppliers of non-proprietary market information products (also called data
          vendors). A vertical relationship therefore exists between the supply of proprietary
          market data and the provision of non-proprietary market data. In this regard, the
          notified transaction results in vertically affected markets, since the Notifying Parties
          each hold market shares above 25% in the upstream market for proprietary market data
          which serves as an input into the provision of non-proprietary market data.
   (154) Nonetheless, with regard to possible input foreclosure concerns stemming from this
          vertical relationship, pursuant to MiFID, trading venues are required to make
          proprietary data relating to equities admitted to trading on a Regulated Market within
          the Union accessible to other market participants on "reasonable commercial terms" and
          "a non-discriminatory basis"75. Therefore, given these mandatory regulatory
          requirements, in respect of equities data, the Notifying Parties do not appear to have the
          ability to foreclose their downstream rivals’ access to their proprietary data and no input
          foreclosure concerns are likely to arise. As concerns market data other than data related
          to equities, while the regulatory requirements specified above do not apply, it should be
          noted that overall, the majority of the Notifying Parties’ revenues from proprietary
          market data are derived from sales through third party data vendors, with a smaller
   75
           MiFID, articles 29-30 and 44-45.
EN                                                 31                                                 EN

          portion of sales made directly to end-users. Therefore, it can be excluded that the
          Notifying Parties would have any incentive to foreclose their downstream competitors.
   (155) In light of the low market shares held by the Notifying Parties in the downstream
          market for the supply of non-proprietary data, customer foreclosure concerns can also
          be excluded. Moreover, as the proprietary data generated by different exchanges are
          complementary, and providers of non-proprietary data often seek to market a wide
          selection of data streams, the Notifying Parties have an incentive to continue purchasing
          data from other proprietary data sources (such as other trading venues).
   (156) Some concerns have been raised in the context of the market investigation in respect of
          the relationship between the supply of proprietary market data and cash and derivatives
          trading.
   (157) As specified, each Notifying Party is the sole provider of proprietary market data
          generated on its own trading venues. According to the Notifying Parties, even where the
          same instrument is traded on both Notifying Parties’ trading venues, market data
          relating to a given instrument generated by one Party are not generally substitutable for
          data relating to the same instrument generated by the other Notifying Party due to the
          high asymmetries in trading volumes. Moreover, the Notifying Parties submit that there
          could be a question as to whether a proprietary data product of a third party venue with
          a comparable trading volume (such as an MTF) may be substitutable for the data
          product for the same instrument of one of the Notifying Parties. In addition, the
          Notifying Parties submit that the higher the (proportion of) trading volume in a specific
          instrument on a certain venue, the more credible the data from this venue will be.
   (158) While acknowledging the Notifying Parties' pre-merger ability to act independently of
          any competitive constraints in the provision of proprietary market data, some market
          participants expressed concerns that the proposed merger would further enhance the
          value and importance of the market data provided by the Notifying Parties and that the
          proposed merger would therefore likely lead to an increase in fees and the bundling of
          data products.76
   (159) Nevertheless the Commission considers that the notified transaction will not have any
         merger-specific effects on the provision of proprietary market data as the Notifying
         Parties are today already the sole providers of proprietary market data generated on each
         of their own trading venues.
   (160) It follows that competition concerns do not arise on any of the possible markets for
          market data.
      8.2.2.    Index licensing
   (161) The Notifying Parties are both active in the licensing of indices.
   (162) NYX licenses to issuers of ETFs and structured products, in particular, the French CAC
          40 indices and the Dutch AEX indices (national indices). NYX also owns a 50%
          interest in FTSEurofirst (pan-European index), a joint venture with the FTSE Group.
   76
            AFME, response to question 175 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers – Phase 1.
EN                                                    32                                            EN

   (163) DB owns and licenses to issuers of ETFs and structured products, in particular, the
         German DAX indices and a variety of STOXX Indices, including the very liquid
         Eurostoxx 50 benchmark index77.
   (164) The Notifying Parties submit that their combined market share in index licensing would
         be below 15% under any plausible market definition. As regards markets for national
         indices, however, which the market investigation has indicated constitute separate
         relevant markets, there is no overlap between the Parties although each of them
         achieves close to [90-100%]* in each of the relevant markets concerned.
   (165) Nonetheless, as regards pan-European equity indices, the market investigation indicated
         that the importance of EuroSTOXX 50 due to the very liquid derivative market as
         discussed in the Section 11.2.1.6.2.1 below would likely result in a high market share
         should a market for the licensing of pan-European equity indices be identified.
   (166) Despite this, it appears that the increment resulting from the joint venture between NYX
         and FTSE in this market would be small. Moreover, there are other providers including
         Russell, MSCI and S&P. Moreover, the Commission notes that the market investigation
         has not raised concerns as regards the horizontal effects of the notified transaction in
         index licensing, but only concerns as regards the vertical relationship with the trading
         and clearing of equity index derivatives resulting from the merger.
   (167) It follows that competition concerns do not arise as a result of horizontal effects on any
         of the possible markets for licensing of equity indices, whether national or pan-
         European.
   (168) The vertical effects of the notified transaction in respect of index licensing is analysed
         in Section 11.2.1.6 below.
   9.      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
   (169) The Notifying Parties both supply a range of information technology products and
         services to the financial services industry78. In brief, the Notifying Parties’ activities in
         this area consist of a number of products and services that are intended to support and
         execute trading and post-trading transactions, enable connectivity to the Notifying
         Parties’ trading venues and supporting services (or those of others), and facilitate the
         effective management of market (and other trading related) data.
   (170) The Notifying Parties in their submission make a distinction between "Technology and
         IT Services" on the one hand and "Technology and IT Software Products" on the other.
         According to this distinction, as far as IT services are concerned, the Notifying Parties
         indicate that they both provide: (a) transaction tools (aimed at informing and facilitating
   77
           DB is in particular active in index licensing through STOXX Limited (“STOXX”) and International
           Securities Exchange (“ISE”). DB holds 50% plus one share in STOXX, the remainder being held by
           SIX (the Notifying Parties submit that DB exercises sole control over STOXX), and has (via Eurex
           Zürich and Eurex, and its 100% subsidiary U.S. Exchange Holdings) a 100% interest in International
           Securities Exchange, LLC.
   78
           The Notifying Parties in the Form CO characterize this sector of their activity as "technology and
           information technology services".
EN                                                      33                                                    EN

          the trading practices of market participants, including tools to support investment
          decisions such as risk management tools, portfolio analysis tools); (b) exchange
          solutions (for example customer access interfaces, trading engines and data
          distribution); and (c) global connectivity (provision of physical infrastructure allowing
          market participants to be connected to a trading venue, including co-location, proximity
          hosting and network connectivity). As far as IT products (software) are concerned, the
          Notifying Parties indicate that they both provide trading solutions software (namely
          products that facilitate market participants' management of financial market data).
     9.1. MARKET DEFINITION
       9.1.1.    IT services
   (171) The Notifying Parties consider the relevant product market for the services which they
          categorize as "IT services" to be the market for all IT services, which includes, for
          instance, hardware maintenance, software maintenance and support, IT and business
          consulting, software development and integration, IT management services, business
          management services and education and training, irrespective of the application or
          industry sector concerned. To support this position, they contend that: (1) many
          customers purchase numerous IT services from a single provider; (2) many global IT
          services providers are active in multiple (and often in their view in all or nearly all)
          segments of IT services; and (3) there is a substantial degree of supply-side
          substitutability in the supply of all IT services.
   (172) The Commission has in previous decisions indicated that a single product market for all
          IT services might exist, but did not exclude that narrower markets may be identified
          based on categorisations commonly used in the industry, for instance by customer
          activity, or customer size.79 The Commission has, however, left the market definition
          open.
   (173) Given that the Notifying Parties are active in providing IT products and services only to
          the financial industry, and in particular to large corporations, these are the market
          segments where the Notifying Parties overlap and on which the notified transaction may
          produce effects. The segments where the Notifying Parties are both active to any
          significant extent are the provision of exchange solutions to trading venues and
          connectivity services to their own venues.
   (174) In respect of exchange solutions, the market investigation has nonetheless provided
          grounds to question whether this segment of activity should be regarded as an "IT
          service" in the sense advanced by the Notifying Parties and considered in the decisions
          which they cite. At the core of the offering of the Parties in this area is a hosted software
          offering. Since any complex and specialised software offering is likely to be
          accompanied by a range of services allowing this software to be managed, supported
          and used, and since moreover there is a general trend for increasing supply of software
          on a hosted basis as a service (so-called "SaaS"), it is therefore more consistent with
          market reality to discuss this segment of the Parties' activities in the next Section.
   79
            See for instance Case No. COMP/M. 5666 Xerox / Affiliated Computer Services and Case No
            COMP/M. 5301 Capgemini / BAS.
EN                                                   34                                                 EN

   (175) The Notifying Parties consider that the relevant geographic market for assessing
         competition in IT services is at least EEA-wide and likely worldwide in scope, as major
         providers of IT services operate on a worldwide basis, and the Notifying Parties
         themselves supply IT services to customers on a global basis.
   (176) In previous decisions, the Commission has indicated that the IT services market has
         increasingly shown a trend towards internationalisation of supply and demand, and has
         considered EEA wide and worldwide markets as possible alternatives, but left the exact
         geographic scope open.80
      9.1.2.    Software
   (177) Computer software consists of specific programs, routines, and symbolic language that
         control the functioning of computer hardware and direct its operations. There are three
         different categories of computer software, namely operating systems, middleware and
         application software. The Notifying Parties consider that a general product market exists
         for business applications software.
   (178) In previous cases concerning software products, the Commission has considered the
         possibility of segmenting further business application software on the basis of its end-
         use.81 In certain instances, it has gone further and concluded that there exist distinct
         relevant markets for specific software applications82. The ensuing analysis will therefore
         focus on the segments of exchange solutions and trading solutions software as these are
         the segments in which the Notifying Parties are active.
   (179) The Notifying Parties consider that the relevant geographic market for software
         products is at least EEA-wide and likely worldwide, as major providers of software
         products operate on a worldwide basis. The Notifying Parties supply software products
         to customers on a global basis. In previous decisions, the Commission has noted that the
         geographic scope of the software market and/or of the possible segments is at least
         EEA-wide, if not worldwide.83 The Parties' exchange solutions are clearly provided on a
         worldwide basis.
      9.1.3.    Conclusion on market definition
   (180) In any event, the exact product and geographic market definition can be left open for the
         purpose of this Decision, since the notified transaction does not raise competition
         concerns under any reasonable alternative market definition.
   80
           See for instance Case No COMP/M.5197 HP / EDS. This does not of course preclude that, in specific
           areas, narrower geographic markets may apply.
   81
           See for instance Case No COMP/M. 5080 Oracle/Bea.
   82
           Thus for example in case COMP/M.5597 Towers Perrin/Watson Wyatt, the Commission concluded on
           the existence of a separate market for actuarial software for life insurance; in COMP/M.3216
           Oracle/Peoplesoft, the Commission concluded on the existence of a distinct market for high-function
           financial and human resource management solutions or software for large enterprises with complex
           functional needs; individual software markets were also defined in the 2004 Microsoft antitrust
           decision.
   83
           See for instance Case No. COMP/M.5080 Oracle/Bea.
EN                                                     35                                                      EN

     9.2. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
   (181) Whether on an EEA or worldwide scope of the possible market segments, the only
          market segments where the Notifying Parties would have a combined share above 15%
          would be in the segment of exchange solutions.84
       9.2.1.     Exchange solutions
   (182) The Notifying Parties have combined merchant market shares of [20-30%]* for
          exchange solutions (NYX [10-20%]*; DB [10-20%]*) at a global level.85 According to
          the Notifying Parties, the largest player in this segment is Nasdaq OMX with [40-50%]*
          and a number of other players are also active, such as Cinnober ([5-10%]*), BME ([5-
          10%]*) and LSE ([0-5%]*). Further, the Notifying Parties argue that, in this segment,
          in-house development of exchange solutions also constitutes an additional relevant
          competitive constraint.
   (183) The market investigation has not raised any concerns in this area, and there are some
          indications that barriers to entry may be declining due to the declining cost of matching
          engine technology.86
   (184) Therefore, and in the absence of any concerns raised by the Parties' customers or
          competitors, it can be concluded that the notified transaction does not raise competition
          concerns with regard to the possible market for exchange trading solutions.
       9.2.2.     Global connectivity services
   (185) The Notifying Parties both offer what they define as global connectivity services,
          meaning the provision of physical infrastructure allowing market participants to be
          connected to a trading venue. These include the provision of co-location services (rental
          of space at the data centre where a venue's matching engine is located), proximity
          hosting (at a data centre close to the matching engine's location)87 and network
          connectivity services (which are other points of access to a trading venue).88 The closer
          a trader is to the matching engine, the lower the latency89 as well as typically the higher
          the cost.
   (186) The Notifying Parties consider that since global connectivity services supplied by an
          exchange are unique to that trading venue, there is by definition no overlap between the
   84
            These products and services in this category help exchanges and other trading venues to perform trade-
            related actions (for instance customer access interface, trading engines, and data distribution), as well as
            post-trade services such as clearing and settlement. According to the Notifying Parties, trading venues
            either develop their own proprietary exchange solutions system (so-called “self-supply”) or contract
            with a third party supplier (generally either a trading venue or specialist IT company) for the provision
            of exchange solutions services.
   85
            ,[…]*.
   86
            Chi-X Europe, response to question 153 of Q 3 – Questionnaire to competitors, [...]*.
   87
            As the Notifying Parties are not active in providing proximity hosting services, these will not be
            examined further (see Section 6.18 of IT section of the Form CO).
   88
            These may be provided either by the trading venue itself or by third party connectivity providers, i.e.
            the so-called Application Service Providers, "ASPs" and Extranet Service Providers, "ESPs", that
            provide customers with access to the trading venue via their own physical infrastructure networks.
   89
            The lower the latency the less time between the emission and reception of the information.
EN                                                          36                                                           EN

         activities of the Notifying Parties within this segment as the services that are provided
         by DB and NYX are not substitutable.
   (187) As regards the co-location services segment, whilst NYX has a large new data centre in
         Basildon, UK, DB uses a third party data centre operated by Equinix to host its servers
         and […]* – it therefore does not currently offer co-location services directly itself.
         Furthermore, the first phase market investigation generally indicated that customers
         seek access to the trading venues of both Parties, meaning that, if they make use of such
         services at all, they are in most cases customers to both Parties. This would tend to
         confirm the Notifying Parties' claim that their offerings are not interchangeable and that
         they are therefore complementary on the demand side. This suggests that co-location
         services are indeed likely to be venue specific and not substitutable.
   (188) Nonetheless, the first phase market investigation revealed concerns from certain market
         players that, following the notified transaction, DB would change the location of its
         matching engine to the NYX data centre in Basildon, and that this would allow the
         merged entity to charge higher prices.
   (189) […]* the fact that the services currently on offer by each of the Parties are not
         substitutes implies that there is no reason why the merger would provide the Parties
         with the means to increase overall prices for these services over those that prevail pre-
         merger. The submissions made by third parties in this regard are neither sufficiently
         detailed nor based on substantiated evidence and it can therefore be excluded that such
         effects would arise as a result of the merger.90
   (190) As regards network connectivity services, DB is active in providing access to its own
         trading venues via Managed Network Services,91 whilst NYX is active in providing
         remote access points to a specific set of trading venues (mainly its own) via the platform
         SFTI. Network connectivity services to trading venues can also be provided by third
         party connectivity providers, namely so-called Application Service Providers, "ASPs"
         and Extranet Service Providers, "ESPs". Such players are customers of the Notifying
         Parties, obtaining co-location and/or network connectivity services and then providing
         their own customers with access to a number of trading venues via their own physical
         infrastructure networks.
   (191) During the first phase market investigation, certain players raised concerns that, given
         the importance of the trading venues of the Notifying Parties, they would have an
         incentive to foreclose ASPs and ESPs from access to their connectivity services as the
         Notifying Parties would compete with those players in providing network connectivity
         services to third party trading venues.
   (192) The Notifying Parties themselves have submitted that they do not consider themselves
         to compete with such ASP and ESP providers as they provide access only to their own
         trading venues, or to a very specific and limited set of trading venues beyond their own
   90
           [Discussion of confidential information demonstrating that NYX and DB do not compete with respect
           to the provision of colocation and network connectivity services]*.
   91
           Given that DB provides and hosts the trading systems of the Irish Stock Exchange and of Wiener Borse
           AG, it also provides these two stock exchanges with network connectivity. These services account for
           very limited revenue.
EN                                                       37                                                     EN

         trading venues and in any event merely as ancillary services to other main services
         being provided to such trading venues. On its SFTI Europe website, NYX refers to
         providing "comprehensive connectivity" to a "range of other trading [venues]" but
         according to information provided by the Notifying Parties, […]*. According to the
         Notifying Parties, these are services to which SFTI is connected given the prevailing
         business relationship with those venues and should therefore be considered as ancillary
         services, in particular as regards the supply of exchange solutions. In all cases, NYX
         argues that […]*. Finally, according to information provided by the Notifying Parties,
         only a very limited number of SFTI customers use these access arrangements for each
         of these third party trading venues, […]*.
   (193) On the basis of the above, it can be concluded that NYX and DB are not currently active
         or competing for the provision of comprehensive network connectivity services.
   (194) [Discussion on confidential information demonstrating that NYX and DB do not
         compete with respect to the provision of colocation and network connectivity
         services]*.
   (195) [Discussion of confidential information demonstrating that NYX and DB do not
         compete with respect to the provision of colocation and network connectivity
         services]*, no merger-specific effect would arise.
   (196) As a result, the Commission considers that the ability and incentives for the merged
         entity to foreclose access to DB's current trading venues, if any, will not change as a
         result of the merger and that therefore the concerns raised by the third parties in
         question have not been substantiated and are not likely to arise as a consequence of the
         proposed merger.
   (197) In light of the fact that (a) access to one or more of the trading venues of one of the
         Notifying Parties does not appear to be substitutable with access to the trading venues of
         the other Party and (b) there is only a very limited, ancillary service offering of NYX
         and DB in the downstream market of network connectivity to third party venues, it is
         concluded that the notified transaction does not raise competition concerns with respect
         to the possible markets for exchange colocation and network connectivity services.
   10.      COLLATERAL MANAGEMENT
    10.1. MARKET DEFINITION
     10.1.1. Product Market Definition
   (198) Collateral is offered by one party to a bilateral agreement as a guarantee of
          performance. Collateral management can be carried out in-house, where the collateral
          flows are monitored for own accounts, or it can be outsourced to a third party in the
          context of so-called tri-party collateral management as compared to "bilateral collateral
          arrangements" between the two parties to a transaction.
   (199) Depending on the provider's service profile, collateral management services ("CMS")
          may encompass, inter alia, the selection of collateral, matching of transaction details,
          valuation and safekeeping of the securities held as collateral and their monitoring as
EN                                                  38                                              EN

         well as optimisation, substitution, settlement or custody services. Due to the increased
         requirements as to the efficient management of collateral, companies nowadays tend to
         reorganise collateral management and, for instance involve optimisation tools.
   (200) NYX is not active in the provision of CMS. DB via Clearstream Banking Frankfurt
         ("CBF") and Clearstream Banking Luxemburg ("CBL") provides CMS services as a
         stand-alone service (tri-party CMS) and in connection with other service offerings92. In
         addition, DB provides CMS as an integrated part of Euro GC Pooling, a cash-driven
         general collateral segment of the trading platform Eurex Repo. Other tri-party CMS
         providers include companies such as Euroclear, Bank of New York Mellon and JP
         Morgan.
   (201) Since collateral management services may be, and frequently are, provided
         independently of other post-trading services, it follows that they may plausibly
         constitute a market in their own right. The Commission received comments supporting
         this view that CMS should be distinguished from other post-trade services including
         clearing, settlement and custody93. As to the latter, it has also been submitted that CMS
         does not have to be provided by the custodian of the collateral94. The CMS market can
         be regarded as a market downstream from the markets for trading and clearing.
   (202) At a relatively advanced stage of the procedure, the Commission received comments
         from certain CMS providers raising foreclosure concerns on the basis that the relevant
         product market should be defined at the level of each clearing-house/CCP (that is to say
         each collateral pool), since the CMS that clearing members and their underlying clients
         require, for instance, in connection with trading and clearing on Eurex is not the same
         as the CMS they require in connection with trading and clearing on other
         infrastructures. Furthermore, according to these complainants, a CMS provider needs a
         data feed from the CCP on transactions cleared by that CCP and on the resulting
         exposure (variation) of the market participant in question in order to perform its
         services.
   (203) The Notifying Parties do not agree with this proposed narrow product market definition
         and argue that CMS always involves multiple business lines where collateral provision
         is required and that CMS does not differ significantly as to whether it relates to
         collateral to be posted with infrastructures such as CCPs or CSDs, with market
         participants in the context of bilateral OTC transactions, or with central banks.
   (204) The CMS which clearing members and their clients demand with respect to trading and
         clearing on one trading venue/CCP may indeed be specific and not interchangeable
         with services required for other infrastructures. There are, however, also reasons,
         including those discussed below (see assessment), that suggest a wider market based
         on, for instance, supply side substitutability between the provision of CMS for different
         collateral takers such as different CCPs. The fact that a transaction feed is needed for a
   92
           For instance, Triparty Repo Service and Triparty Securities Lending Service.
   93
           See attachment to Euroclear's reply to questionnaire Q6 of 13 July 2011, Market Definition, paragraphs
           5.9.3 and 5.9.4 [...]*; see submission of Bank of New York Mellon of 26 September 2011, paragraph 20
           [...]*.
   94
           See attachment to Euroclear's reply to questionnaire Q6 of 13 July 2011, Market Definition, paragraphs
           5.9.4 [...]*.
EN                                                        39                                                      EN

         CMS provider in order to perform the respective service is not relevant as such for the
         purpose of market definition.
   (205) The Commission can, however, leave open the question of whether the collateral
         management service market should be further subdivided on the basis of individual
         pools of collateral since, regardless of how the market is defined, no competition
         concerns arise.
     10.1.2. Geographic market definition
   (206) The Notifying Parties consider that the CMS market is global because CMS providers
         can deploy their services globally. Other market participants suggested national
         markets, for instance, because of the strong involvement of central banks in
         collateralised transactions, or, alternatively, European wide or Euro-zone markets with
         a view to the different time zones for trading and interbank transactions in other regions
         such as Asia or the US.
   (207) For the purposes of the present Decision, the precise geographic market definition can,
         however, be left open since the transaction does not raise competition concerns under
         any of the alternative definitions.
    10.2. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
   (208) NYX is not active in the provision of CMS. Consequently, the transaction does not
         result in horizontal effects. Since the provision of CMS is a market which is
         downstream to the activities of the Notifying Parties in trading and clearing, in several
         of which they have very high market shares, it needs to be assessed whether the
         transaction might result in vertical effects.
   (209) It has been argued by certain providers of CMS that NYX's and DB's strengthened
         position in the upstream markets as a result of the notified transaction - in combination
         with DB's operation of a "closed vertical silo" including Eurex Clearing - might bring
         about (input) foreclosure risks and deprive users of a free choice of CMS providers.
         These providers argue that the combined entity would be able to further add to its
         critical mass in clearing services (of DB/Eurex Clearing) as a result of the migration of
         the volumes that are currently being traded on Euronext and LIFFE. Due to the
         Notifying Parties' strong position in clearing, the claim is that they would be in a
         position to induce users of its clearing services to also use DB's Clearstream, the
         provider of post-trading services such as settlement and CMS
   (210) Furthermore, according to these providers, the notified transaction would enable
         DB/Eurex to continue and expand its existing business practices in this regard, which
         allegedly consist in not giving competing CMS providers data feeds on transactions
         cleared by Eurex Clearing and in not being willing to open accounts to which users can
         post collateral with competitors of Clearstream, which de facto makes Clearstream the
         only third party CMS provider for all collateral posted against positions at the CCP of
         the merged entity.
EN                                                 40                                               EN

   (211) The Notifying Parties submit that […]*95. Moreover, as to the collateral Eurex Clearing
         members have to post in relation to their risk exposure, CBF in its capacity as the
         German CSD only acts as the designated custodian, which would not prevent any other
         provider of CMS from providing CMS to clearing members of Eurex Clearing .
         Although Eurex Clearing members may appoint Clearstream as their CMS provider,
         they are not required to do so, […]*. Finally, Eurex does not provide Clearstream with
         any real-time information in connection with Clearstream's provision of CMS for Eurex
         Clearing members; each and every member of Eurex Clearing receives real-time
         information about its trades and exposures and can forward this information to any
         provider of CMS that they choose96.
   (212) First, the Commission takes the view that any conduct on the part of DB/Eurex which is
         independent of the notified transaction does not need to be assessed pursuant to the
         rules of the Merger Regulation since a merger-specific effect does not arise97. There are
         also no indications that specific practices such as the alleged refusal to provide
         transaction feeds could or would be "expanded" as a result of the notified transaction.
   (213) Secondly, as regards the posting of collateral and safekeeping on accounts at
         Clearstream, the merger has no impact on CBF's function as the German CSD (see also
         Recital (133)).
   (214) Since the Commission under the Merger Regulation is required to assess only those
         effects that arise as a result of the notified transaction, it will focus on the issue of
         whether the integrated margin pool upstream is likely to foreclose competing and non-
         integrated CMS providers downstream from access to an essential input and thereby put
         them at a disadvantageous competitive position.
   (215) The Commission has not found evidence of foreclosure of non-integrated CMS
         providers as a result of the integrated margin pool upstream. First, according to
         information provided by the Notifying Parties, […]*98. As a result, Eurex Clearing
         members are free to choose their own CMS providers and manage their collateral
         without using Clearstream's CMS. There are no reasons to believe that the merger will
         alter this situation in any respect. Secondly, in response to third party comments that
         Clearstream's strong position in CMS results from its relationship with Eurex clearing,
         the Notifying Parties submit that […]*99.
   (216) Therefore, it is concluded that the notified transaction does not raise merger-specific
         competition concerns in relation to the provision of collateral management services.
   95
           Notifying Parties' submission of 4 October 2011 in response to the Commission's Request for
           Information ("RFI") of 29 September 2011, executive summary, third bullet point.
   96
           Notifying Parties' submission of 4 October 2011 in response to RFI of 29 September 2011, paragraph
           17.
   97
           This is without prejudice to the conformity of any such conduct pursuant to Articles 101 and/or 102
           TFEU.
   98
           Notifying Parties' submission of 4 October 2011 in response to RFI of 29 September 2011, executive
           summary, third bullet point.
   99
           Notifying Parties' submission of 4 October 2011 in response to RFI of 29 September 2011, paragraphs
           12 and 14.
EN                                                      41                                                     EN

   11.      DERIVATIVES
   (217) The Notifying Parties both operate platforms for the exchange trading of derivatives
          contracts. Within the EEA, NYX owns and operates Liffe Administration and
          Management, a derivatives exchange based in London, together with derivatives
          exchanges in Amsterdam, Brussels, Paris and Lisbon (collectively referred to as
          "Liffe"), while DB is active in this area mainly through the derivatives exchanges Eurex
          Zurich and Eurex Deutschland (collectively referred to as "Eurex").
   (218) As concerns the economic importance of derivatives within the business of the merged
          entity, it is anticipated that these will represent […]* of the forecast EUR […]*
          revenues of the merged entity and […]* of EUR […]* EBITDA of the merged entity,
          thus reaching close to EUR […]* annually.100
   (219) This Section of the Decision is divided into two parts, dealing respectively with market
          definition and competitive assessment for all of the relevant markets related to
          derivatives (with the exception of collateral management which is discussed in Section
          10).
       11.1.     MARKET DEFINITION
   (220) The Notifying Parties' activities in derivatives overlap in three main areas:
             - trading and Central Counterparty (CCP) clearing of exchange traded derivatives
                  contracts (ETDs) in various asset classes, namely European interest rate
                  derivatives, European single-stock equity derivatives, European equity index
                  derivatives and to a lesser extent commodity derivatives (Section 10.1.1);
             - provision of services aimed at capturing OTC block trades in ETDs and bringing
                  them “on exchange” which consists in registration and confirmation of the trades
                  followed by CCP clearing services (Section 10.1.2.); and
             - provision of services aimed at capturing OTC flex trades, primarily in European
                  equity and equity index derivatives, via registration and confirmation of the
                  trades followed by CCP clearing services (Section 10.1.3).
       11.1.1. Trading and clearing of exchange traded derivatives
       11.1.1.1.INTRODUCTION
   (221) Derivatives are financial contracts whose value is derived from an underlying variable
          (asset), known as the "underlying". Derivatives allow the transfer of risk from one
          economic agent to another. Through derivatives contracts, undertakings exposed in the
          course of their business to various types of economic risk may offload that risk to other
          entities more willing or better placed to assume it, either in the short term to dealers who
          then trade the risk on, or to final investors who hold the risk for the duration of the
          exposure. As a result, derivatives have two main purposes: (i) to eliminate or reduce the
          uncertainty whereby economic agents insure against some specific type of risk
   100
            DB's internal document, […]*.
EN                                                   42                                                EN

         ("hedging"), and (ii) investing, whereby economic agents use derivatives contracts as an
         alternative to investing directly in the underlying asset. In addition to this "fundamental"
         demand deriving from the needs of the real economy and of investors, derivatives may also
         be traded by entities wishing to arbitrage against the underlying and correlated investments
         and by market makers providing liquidity in specific contracts.
   (222) Eurex and Liffe operate platforms allowing derivatives users to trade certain derivatives
         contracts and have them cleared. Derivatives contracts traded on exchanges are
         designed, introduced, and regulated by the derivatives exchanges that created them.101
         They are commonly referred to as "exchange-traded derivatives" or "ETDs". Each
         category of contracts has its own specifications, exercise, and delivery processes, which
         the exchange determines and oversees. To attract liquidity in standardised derivatives
         contracts, exchanges design contract characteristics (for instance the pay-out
         mechanism, the tick size,102 contract size, leverage, etc.) to best match customers'
         preferences. Successful derivatives contracts become very liquid, reaching several
         million of contracts traded per day.
   11.1.1.1.1.        Trading of derivatives
   (223) Trading of derivatives contracts consists of matching buyers and sellers, that is, two
         parties willing to take opposite positions in the same contract.
   (224) Matching between buyers and sellers may be bilateral or multilateral. Bilateral matching
         is trading in which the quoting of prices and execution are conducted between two
         parties in such a way that other market participants do not observe the trading; it
         involves dealers who “make a market” by maintaining bid and offer quotes to market
         participants and look to connect the parties to the contract. Bilateral matching is done
         only in the over-the-counter (or OTC) space through voice brokerage and telephone
         trading. Voice Broking is the traditional method of communicating quotes to market
         participants: the negotiation is conducted over the telephone, either end-user-to-dealer
         or dealer-to-dealer, but it is nowadays enhanced through the use of electronic bulletin
         boards by the dealers for posting their quotes and often highly automated103.
   (225) Matching can also be done on a multilateral basis whereby market participants can
         observe the others' price quotes and trade executions in the market-place. Multilateral
         matching of derivatives buyers and sellers is performed either on exchanges as concerns
         ETDs or on some OTC trading platforms as concerns OTC derivatives contracts.
   (226) Exchanges are the traditional environment for multilateral trading and historically have
         been identified with “pit” trading through open outcry, but in the last decades,
         exchanges have adopted electronic trading platforms that automatically match bids and
   101
           Whereas a cash equities exchange serves as a venue for the trading of products created by third parties (i.e.,
           issuing companies), which exist independently of the venue in which they are traded, a derivatives
           exchange, by contrast, creates a market for the trading of products it has designed itself. Other models for
           derivatives exist, such as for US options where the Options Clearing Corporation (OCC), a user-owned
           utility regulated by the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC), designs the contracts.
   102
           Tick size is the smallest increment by which the price can move.
   103
           Dealers have direct phone lines between themselves and other dealers and their major customers, and
           this enables instantaneous communication.
EN                                                        43                                                              EN

         offers from market participants. Exchange trading involves an order to buy or to sell
         placed by a trader to the exchange's order book, where trades are then executed by
         matching the different orders.
   (227) The OTC space has also adapted new electronic and networking technologies to trading
         needs: beside the “traditional” dealer markets where trades are conducted over the
         phone, electronic platforms automatically matching bids and offers have been created.
         These OTC platforms are operated by broker dealers104 and allow trade execution in a
         multilateral environment. In addition, the landscape of multilateral trading of derivatives
         has been made potentially accessible to Multilateral Trade Facilities ("MTFs"), which
         were created as a result of MiFID105.
   (228) Once seller and buyer have identified each other, the trade is executed meaning that
         seller and buyer enter into a binding contract. After trade execution has taken place, the
         trade is captured, processed and cleared.
   (229) Trading of derivatives has a cost, where the following implicit and explicit elements can
         be identified: on one side, the realised bid-ask spread106 and market impact (also called
         liquidity cost) and the opportunity cost of posting collateral, on the other side,
         membership fees as well as per transaction trading and clearing fees.
   11.1.1.1.2.       Clearing of derivatives
   (230) Clearing consists of a range of post-trade operations, in particular management of
         positions throughout the lifetime of contract, collateral management to address the
         counterparty risk and cash management. Clearing can be bilateral whereby each party is
         exposed to the other party's risk or via a Central Counterparty ("CCP").
   (231) As concerns ETDs, clearing is performed by a CCP. A CCP provides a performance
         guarantee by legally interposing itself between the buyer and the seller. As a result, the
         CCP steps into each trade, thereby becoming a buyer to the selling party and a seller to
         the buying trading party. The CCP is contractually required to perform both contracts,
         even if the counterparty in one of the contracts defaults. When a trade is settled at
         maturity, the CCP handles deliveries which may take the form of either cash settlement
         payments or physical delivery of the underlying assets in return for payment.
   (232) The chart in Figure 3 illustrates the various services involved in the clearing of a
         derivative contract.
   104
           For instance BGC Brokers LP, certain ICAP platforms, GFI Group, certain Tulett Prebon platforms,
           TradeWeb, and a Tradition Securities and Futures platform.
   105
           MiFID opened access to financial markets for entities other than traditional exchanges ("Regulated
           markets" under MiFID) and classified these entities as MTFs or Systematic Internalisers ("SIs").
           Examples of MTFs with a licence to trade derivatives are Turquoise and TOM.
   106
           Bid-ask spread is the difference between quoted prices for sale (ask) and for purchase (bid). The
           realised spread is the average spread achieved on the total trade.
EN                                                        44                                                  EN

         Figure 3: Clearing Process for a Derivative
        Source: Form CO, Derivatives, p. 70
   (233) The CCP, by interposing itself in each contract, assumes the risk of counterparty default
         on behalf of trading parties. To this end, the CCP assesses the level of risk and manages
         it throughout the lifetime of each contract. To cover itself against the risk, the CCP
         determines so-called margin (collateral) requirements and establishes a default fund to
         which each trading member has to contribute according to its position. Margin
         requirements are normally composed of: (i) initial margin intended to provide a
         'cushion' of collateral to open a position calculated by reference to the default risk
         associated with the contract in question; and (ii) maintenance (variation) margin which
         represents the amount needed to collateralise the existing mark-to-market value of the
         open positions, reflecting the changes in market prices of the underlying asset. Margin
         levels are calculated every day and if the posted margin is below the minimal margin
         requirement to cover all open positions of a party at a certain point in time, additional
         margin calls are issued, requiring the party to increase the posted margin.107 In addition
         to the margin, clearing members provide contributions to a CCP’s default fund so that it
         can bear the costs of counterparty non-performance should the collateral provided by a
         defaulting clearing member prove insufficient.
   (234) CCPs charged to clear ETDs are chosen by the derivatives exchange platform which
         designs the contracts and on which trades on particular ETDs are executed. It follows
         that derivatives users generally have no choice of CCP for their derivatives trades executed
         on-exchange. Exchanges typically offer an integrated service for which some exchanges
         running vertically integrated models, such as Eurex, charge a single fee.
   (235) A trade of a derivatives contract gives rise to an open position also called open interest.
         When new trades are executed, they are either added as new open positions or offset
   107
           See Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.193 et seq.
EN                                                      45                                            EN

         against the existing open positions. Where a party has multiple positions with a single
         CCP, netting and cross-margining108 can significantly lower the overall level of margin
         that a user must post as well as the contribution to the default fund that clearing
         members need to provide.
   (236) In the absence of interoperability agreements or cross-margining agreements between
         different CCPs, netting and cross-margining can be carried out only within a single
         CCP.
   11.1.1.1.3.       Link between trading and clearing in the area of derivatives
   (237) Clearing is of particular importance for derivatives contracts since the value and the
         utility of a contract depends on how that contract is cleared.109 This is because the
         counterparty risk needs to be managed for the lifetime of the contract which could span
         from a few months up to several years. This can be contrasted with cash instruments
         where counterparty risk usually only exists for 2-3 days between the trade date and the
         settlement date (which is generally on a delivery-versus-payment basis).
   (238) At the current stage of market development and in the current regulatory framework,
         contracts traded on different derivatives trading platforms are generally not fungible110
         and no cross-margining is applied between contracts traded on different platforms. In
         the area of derivatives, where with this market set-up, trades on one platform are not
         cleared by different CCPs (and contracts traded on different platforms are not
         concentrated on one CCP), this has led to the phenomenon of liquidity in individual
         asset classes tending to concentrate on one venue. This is because posting margin is a
         capital intensive exercise incurring an opportunity cost which incentivises derivatives
         traders to minimise the collateral they are required to provide by concentrating trades (in
         both one and the same contract and in any correlated contracts which benefit from
         margin offsets) on one trading venue. Simultaneously, exchanges have an incentive to
         offer as wide a portfolio of contracts as possible in a given asset class to attract more
         customers by increasing the potential of margin offsets.
   (239) As a consequence, exchanges have generally historically sought to preserve, and more
         recently also to create, a vertical silo model whereby clearing is controlled by the
         exchange where the contract is traded.111
   (240) As such, whilst trading and clearing could potentially be provided as separate services,
         many exchanges at present generally provide to users an integrated service including the
   108
           Netting refers to offsetting buy and sell positions over a given period of time in a given product, thus
           reducing the number of open positions that need to be cleared and settled. Cross margining involves
           calculating the amount of collateral required from a counterparty to cover the risk presented by that
           counterparty's portfolio. Unlike netting, which only applies to the same products, cross margining
           applies to a range of different products which display a degree of risk correlation.
   109
           See Form CO, Derivatives.
   110
           Fungible contracts are contracts which can be completely netted and offset against each other in the
           case of an equal size buy and sell position cancelling each other out so that no position remains to be
           cleared and settled.
   111
           See for instance NYX' internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011,
           stating: […]*, NYSE Liffe – Global Derivatives Strategy, June 2009, p. 5; and DB's internal document
           provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, highlighting the […]* and that )",[…]*.
EN                                                        46                                                        EN

         trading and clearing of derivatives contracts and for which they may charge a single fee.
         Indeed, many derivatives exchanges (such as Eurex, CME, ICE, etc.) are vertically
         integrated into clearing by operating "clearing-houses" for clearing of instruments
         traded on their venues. Other exchanges, while not being strictly speaking vertically
         integrated into clearing, offer clearing services for contracts executed on their platforms
         through agreements with third-party clearing-houses that they select, generally on an
         exclusive basis (such as Liffe, etc.).112 In such a scenario, customers therefore purchase
         an integrated service from the trading venue and have ultimately no choice of clearing
         services provider.113
   (241) The Notifying Parties submit that because trading and clearing of derivatives are
         intrinsically linked and the value and the utility of a derivatives contract depends on
         how the contract is cleared, from a derivatives trader's perspective (customer of the
         exchanges), clearing of exchange traded derivatives cannot be considered on a separate
         basis from trading of exchange traded derivatives.114 This claim of the Notifying Parties
         is illustrated, in their view, by the fact that exchanges design the derivatives contract
         and determine how that contract will be cleared, clearing being one of the contract
         specifications.115 As a result, the Notifying Parties argue that clearing services
         associated with a particular derivatives contract are part of the overall service provided
         by the exchange and submit that there is no separate market for the provision of clearing
         services to derivatives traders on exchanges.116
   (242) The Commission considers that while at present trading and clearing of exchange traded
         derivatives are provided on a bundled basis from the perspective of a derivatives trader
         conducting a trade on the order book of one of the Notifying Parties117, there is
         nonetheless already today a separate service consisting in on-exchange registration,
         confirmation and clearing of trades agreed away from exchange (be they block or flex
         trades as analysed in Sections 11.1.2 and 11.1.3).
   112
           Each derivatives exchange normally has only one clearing-house. See DB's internal document provided
           in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, stating that: "Competitors copy Eurex model and
           create vertical integration (ICE Clear, Liffe Clear); vertical integration becomes standard model except
           for US Equity Options", .[…]*.
   113
           Certain trading members may not fulfil the clearing membership requirements or may elect not to be a
           direct or general clearing member, but to clear trades through a general clearing member.
   114
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.295 states that "from the perspective of a derivatives trader, the
           clearing services associated with the particular contract are part of the overall service provided by the
           derivatives exchange or OTC trading platform. In other words, there is no separate market for the
           provision of clearing services to derivatives traders."
   115
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.196, second bullet point.
   116
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.294.
   117
           While, as pointed out in the decision opening the proceedings, there is no separate market for the
           clearing of exchange traded derivatives as from the perspective of a derivatives trader trading these
           contracts on the order book, there is a separate market for the provision of derivatives clearing services
           to third party venues and OTC trading platforms. However, this market is not affected by the proposed
           transaction since NYSE Liffe does not provide derivatives clearing services to third parties. The
           Notifying Parties in their response to the decision opening the proceedings did not contest this conclusion.
EN                                                          47                                                          EN

   (243) Therefore, it is concluded for the purpose of this Decision that the impact of the notified
          transaction as regards competition in exchange traded derivatives is to be assessed on
          markets comprising trading and clearing together.118
       11.1.1.2. PRODUCT AND GEOGRAPHIC MARKET
   11.1.1.2.1.        Commission's approach to market definition
   (244) As already referred to above, the conclusions of this Decision are based on a wide-ranging
          market investigation.
   (245) In their response to the SO and during the Oral Hearing, the Notifying Parties criticised the
          Commission for not conducting any empirical, economic or econometric studies, in
          particular as concerns the market definition in the area of derivatives.119
   (246) First, it should be recalled that pursuant to the established case law, there is no hierarchy
          between the types of evidence used by the Commission in merger cases as the Commission
          has the duty to make an overall assessment of the case,120 and that the Commission has a
          certain discretion, especially with respect to assessments of an economic nature.121 In
          Ryanair/Aer Lingus, the Court accepted that quantitative analysis could be useful but
          specified that it is by no means mandatory.122
   (247) Second, the Commission internally analysed the appropriateness of conducting any
          quantitative analyses in this Decision. The Notifying Parties suggested that cross price
          elasticity analysis, critical loss analysis, regression analysis, price correlation analysis,
          stationarity tests, shock analysis, co-integration analysis, merger simulation, own-price
          elasticity analysis, analysis of survey evidence, natural experiment analysis and supply-
          side substitution analysis are analyses in the Commission's "toolbox" but which were not
          used in this case.123 In this respect, the Commission notes that as a matter of principle,
          complex inferences can sometimes be validated or rejected by conducting more
          sophisticated empirical analysis. However, this requires that all the necessary data are
          available to implement the chosen empirical methodology and that the available data are
          of adequate quality. Moreover, there has to be sufficient variability in the data to
   118
            This approach is without prejudice to whether or not this is the only viable way of derivatives trading
            and clearing services being provided to users, in particular since alternative models do exist.
   119
            Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraph 75. See also slide 78 of Notifying Parties'
            presentation at the Oral hearing, 27 October 2011.
   120
            Case T-342/07 Ryanair Holdings v Commission [2010] ECR, paragraph 136: "the applicant’s assertion
            that the ‘non-technical evidence’ cannot be taken into account unless it is supported by ‘technical
            evidence’ cannot be upheld. There is no need to establish such a hierarchy. It is the Commission’s task
            to make an overall assessment of what is shown by the set of indicative factors used to evaluate the
            competitive situation. It is possible, in that regard, for certain items of evidence to be prioritised and
            other evidence to be discounted".
   121
            Case T-342/07 Ryanair Holdings v Commission [2010] ECR, paragraph 29, according to which "the
            Court of Justice has held that the basic provisions of the regulation, in particular Article 2, confer on
            the Commission a certain discretion, especially with respect to assessments of an economic nature, and
            that, consequently, review by the Courts of the European Union of the exercise of that discretion, which
            is essential for defining the rules on concentrations, must take account of the margin of discretion
            implicit in the provisions of an economic nature which form part of the rules on concentrations".
   122
            Case T-342/07 Ryanair Holdings v Commission [2010] ECR, paragraph 406.
   123
            See slide 78 of Notifying Parties' presentation at the Oral hearing, 27 October 2011.
EN                                                          48                                                         EN

         identify references for comparison.124 In order to quantitatively identify the competitive
         constraint the Notifying Parties exercise on each other, variations in the competitive
         pressure of the Notifying Parties on each other through variability in marginal cost,
         entry or exit events, or changes in the regulatory structure would need to be observed.
         Without such changes, the competitive constraint cannot be identified.
   (248) In this regard, the Commission notes that such shifts in the competitive constraint were
         not available. In addition, the price data required to conduct any meaningful empirical
         analysis were not available. Even though list prices for exchange-traded derivatives
         (ETD) are available, an analysis of the published "headline" fees alone would not take
         into account the important role of rebate schemes. These rebates schemes appear to be
         tailored to specific customers and are therefore difficult to analyse other than on a case-
         by-case basis. Rebate schemes are a driving source of competitive interaction among the
         Notifying Parties. In this respect NYX states that […]*.125 DB […]*.126
   (249) In any case, an analysis on explicit ETD fees (list prices taking into account rebates
         schemes) would fail to take into account the other components of the total cost of
         trading, where the total cost of carrying out a derivatives transaction is the parameter
         taken into consideration by customers when deciding where to trade. The total cost of
         trading not only comprises the explicit (trading and clearing) fees but also other
         elements such as bid-ask spreads, cost of collateral, infrastructure costs and regulatory
         capital requirements.
   (250) On the particular point raised by the Parties that the Commission has not attempted to
         subject its key conclusions, such as the constraints imposed by OTC trading, to any
         quantitative analysis, despite having had the time and opportunity to collect all relevant
         data from the major users, the Commission notes that data on OTC trading are very
         difficult to obtain due to the very nature of OTC market. Indeed, this is confirmed by
         the Notifying Parties themselves in the Form CO: "It is generally very challenging to
         produce exact figures for the opaque OTC segment of the global derivatives market"127.
         As a matter of fact, the opacity of the OTC market is a known concern in the financial
         sector which various regulatory initiatives are attempting to address.
   (251) Furthermore, another reason why such analyses would not be meaningful in this case is
         the limited variability in the fee data. The headline unit fees have generally remained
         stable with no material reductions. All in all, it is concluded that conducting any
         empirical analysis, in particular for market definition purposes, would not have been
         meaningful given the lack of suitable data required for those purposes. This is also
         evidenced by the fact that the Notifying Parties themselves were unable to perform any
         such analyses in relation to market definition.
   124
           Further, in accordance with the best practices on submissions of economic evidence any meaningful
           empirical or economic analysis needs to: (i) ask a relevant question that cannot be answered through
           other, less onerous means; (ii) rely on the "right" data; (iii) use the appropriate methodology; (iv) lead to
           clear and relevant conclusions; (v) be robust and counterarguments be given adequate consideration.
   125
           NYX reply to question15 of the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011.
   126
           DB reply to question 13 of the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011.
   127
           Form CO, Derivatives section, paragraph 6.66.
EN                                                         49                                                            EN

   (252) Last, but not least, the Commission rejects the objections raised by the Notifying Parties
         that the findings in this Decision are based on anecdotal evidence. The Commission
         conducted a broad-ranging and comprehensive market investigation and collected
         extensive information from a substantial number of relevant market participants. In
         addition, the Commission analysed a substantial amount of the Notifying Parties' pre-
         merger internal documents which corroborated findings from the market investigation.128
   (253) Taking account of the above, in its approach to the definition of relevant markets in the
         area of derivatives, the Commission performed an overall assessment based on all
         available evidence. The conclusions in this Decision are therefore based on this
         extensive and coherent body of evidence collected throughout the market investigation.
   11.1.1.2.2.       Product market
   (254) Derivatives, as opposed to securities, are contracts between two parties (and not titles)
         which determine the payoffs to be made between the parties. Therefore, derivatives
         contracts, like any other contracts, are governed by contractual terms. These comprise legal
         terms of the contract related to, for example, the parties' capacity to enter into the
         transaction or consequences of counterparty default, and the economic terms, related to the
         economic exposure under the contract. The latter, depending on the type of instrument and
         its complexity, could include for example: the notional value, the type of underlying such
         as equities, commodities or indices; a strike price, that is to say the price at which a
         specific derivative contract can be exercised; an exercise date when the right granted under
         the contract can be exercised; an exercise style, that is to say when, how, and under what
         circumstances the option holder may exercise its rights, currency; tick size,129 etc.
   (255) As already indicated above, derivatives contracts may generally be executed in two
         different environments, namely on-exchange130 or over-the-counter ("OTC"). Derivatives
         contracts which can be traded on an exchange order book are referred to as "listed"
         derivatives or "ETDs" whereas derivatives contracts that do not meet pre-conditions to be
         traded on exchange131 or contracts that are agreed away from exchange are referred to as
   128
           Case T-342/07 Ryanair Holdings v Commission [2010] ECR. The General Court recognised the
           evidentiary value of internal documents at paragraph 138: "Those items of evidence, and in particular
           the extracts of the discussions held during Ryanair’s board meetings in relation to Aer Lingus that are
           in the file, are particularly important in that they corroborate the findings made at the stage of the
           analysis of the market shares and the degree of concentration and precede the analysis of the
           econometric information. They were taken into account as part of the set of factors used by the
           Commission to examine the effects of the concentration on competition".
   129
           See footnote 102 of this Decision.
   130
           The venues on which they are traded are referred to as "exchanges", regardless of whether the trading
           venue(s) achieving significant multilateral trading in these instruments is a traditional exchange or
           another platform. As a result, platforms like Turquoise, BATS and Chi-X Europe trading this type of
           derivatives contract will be referred to as exchanges.
   131
           These prerequisites mainly pertain to the level of standardisation of contracts. Indeed, only contracts
           that are standardised in all of their legal and economic parameters are suited to be traded on exchange.
           This is the very essence of exchange trading where the goal of exchanges is to aggregate liquidity
           though standardisation of contract terms. See Notifying Parties' presentation at the Oral Hearing of 27
           October 2011, slide 8.
EN                                                          50                                                      EN

         "OTC derivatives."132 Within these two areas (ETD and OTC), derivatives contracts may
         be generally classified according to the type of the underlying (such as single stock equity
         derivatives, equity index derivatives, interest rate derivatives, exchange rate derivatives,
         commodity derivatives, etc.), and by the relationship between the underlying and the
         derivative contract (such as future, option, swap).
   (256) According to paragraph 7 of the Notice on the market definition,133 "a relevant product
         market comprises all those products and/or services which are regarded as
         interchangeable or substitutable by the consumer, by reason of the products'
         characteristics, their prices and their intended use". The Commission's market
         investigation in this Decision has sought to determine the scope of the relevant product
         market in the area of trading and clearing of exchange traded derivatives contracts, and in
         particular the relevance of the various classifications of derivatives contracts for the
         purpose of defining the market.
   (257) The Notifying Parties submit that the relevant market in this Decision is a single global
         market for risk transfer comprising trading in a wide variety of derivatives irrespective
         of the underlying asset, both on-exchange and OTC. To support their claim, they argue
         that the purpose of derivatives trading is to transfer risk and in this context, from the
         demand-side, all derivatives would perform the same functions: a derivatives trader
         would seek to acquire a particular risk profile in the most convenient and lowest-cost
         way, irrespective of the particular contracts that will convey the desired risk exposure,
         the underlying asset and the trading venue.134 The demand-side of the market, in the
         Notifying Parties' view, is represented by an international community of highly
         sophisticated financial institutions for which exchanges and OTC dealers "compete to
         serve [their] wholesale risk transfer needs."135 The Notifying Parties claim that from
         the supply-side perspective, there is an increasing convergence in the functionality of
         derivatives available on-exchange and OTC and in the respective trading mechanisms,
         and that this supports the conclusion of one overall global risk transfer market. In
         addition, the Notifying Parties believe that the current regulatory convergence between
         the exchange and OTC environments at which various proposed reforms around the
         world are targeted is likely to make the OTC and the exchange space even more
         homogeneous and that therefore both forms of trading would become further
         substitutable from the demand-side.136
   (258) The Commission has not previously dealt with derivatives markets from the point of view
         of the exchange platforms, and hence there are no relevant precedents dealing with
         market definition in the area of derivatives.
   (259) In this Decision, the Commission focused on assessing the implication of the execution
         environment on the product market definition and in particular the level of competitive
   132
           As indicated, ETDs may also be traded away from the order book – therefore “OTC” – and
           subsequently brought onto the exchange for clearing in so-called “off-order book trading”.
           Notwithstanding the style of trading, such contracts are identical to those traded on the order book.
   133
           Commission Notice on definition of the relevant market for the purposes of Community competition
           law ("Notice on market definition"), OJ C 372 of 9 December 1997, p. 5 et seq.
   134
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraphs 6.37, 6.290, and 6.180.
   135
           E. Paul Rowady, The Global Risk Transfer Market: Developments in OTC and Exchange-Traded
           Derivatives, a TABB Group Study (the “TABB Report”), November 2010, Form CO, Annex D.1.
   136
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraphs 6.98 et seq.
EN                                                       51                                                      EN

         constraint exercised by OTC derivatives on listed products generally and within
         individual asset classes, the level of demand and supply substitutability between various
         underlying asset classes and the interchangeability between derivatives based on various
         instruments (futures, options, swaps).
                            11.1.1.2.2.1.      Classification of derivatives according to the execution mode:
                                 ETDs vs OTC
   (260) The decision opening the proceedings concluded that ETDs traded on the Notifying
         Parties' derivatives exchanges and derivatives contracts traded OTC likely constitute
         separate markets. This conclusion was reached on the basis of the results of the first phase
         market investigation pointing towards the lack of substitutability between ETDs and OTC
         derivatives. Indeed, the evidence collected from the Notifying Parties and market
         participants during the first phase market investigation indicated that ETDs and OTC
         derivatives are products which have substantially different characteristics and that
         customer choice between ETDs and OTC derivatives is driven by specific needs at the
         time of their trading decision. As a result, the decision opening the proceedings concluded
         that ETDs and OTC derivatives contracts are complementary rather than substitutable from
         customers' perspectives.
   (261) The Notifying Parties, in their response to the decision opening the proceedings, strongly
         contested this conclusion and argued that OTC trading represents a very significant
         alternative to exchange trading, that traders regularly substitute between OTC and ETDs
         and that OTC trading does not meaningfully differ from exchange trading. As a result, the
         Notifying Parties argued that OTC trading of derivatives should be included in the relevant
         market.137
   (262) The second phase market investigation further highlighted that ETDs, and in particular
         the specific listed options and futures in which the Notifying Parties overlap, are
         complementary rather than substitutable to OTC derivatives. According to the results of
         the market investigation, even customers that trade both ETDs and OTC derivatives do not
         use them as substitutes but rather for very different purposes and in very different
         circumstances. While OTC derivatives are used to provide a perfect hedge to any risk,
         ETDs are used both for taking positions, and for short-term imperfect hedging until a
         perfect hedge is found. As a result, the SO maintained the view that the market for
         derivatives in the asset classes where the Notifying Parties overlap should be subdivided
         according to the execution environment into ETDs and OTC derivatives.138
   (263) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties argued that ETDs face strong
         competition from OTC derivatives. According to the Notifying Parties, this is evidenced
         by the increased standardisation of OTC derivatives driving the convergence between
         the two environments and the fact that any ETD could be replicated over-the-counter
         should the merged entity attempt to exercise market power in exchange trading. In this
         context, the Notifying Parties also invoked at several occasions that close to 90% of the
         overall derivatives market is accounted for by derivatives traded OTC and that only
   137
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, Derivatives
           market definition, paragraph 10 et seq.
   138
           SO, section 1.2.3.2, paragraphs 89 et seq.
EN                                                      52                                                    EN

         slightly more than 10% are traded on exchange, which, in the Notifying Parties' view,
         shows an important competitive constraint from OTC on ETDs.139 In addition, the
         Notifying Parties criticised the evidentiary value of responses to certain questions in the
         Commission's market investigation as well as the Commission's analysis of this
         evidence. Lastly, the Notifying Parties invoked a 2008 Commission Staff Working
         Paper concerning a financial transaction tax as arguably supporting the claim on the
         existence of substitutability of ETDs and OTC derivatives.140
   (264) The Notifying Parties also claimed that the analysis of substitutability between ETDs
         and OTC derivatives should be conducted separately per asset class.141 Whilst the
         Commission has considered relevant differences where appropriate, the high level
         distinction between ETDs and OTC does not differ by asset class for at least two
         reasons. First, the analysis below shows that the lack of substitutability between ETDs
         and OTC derivatives, for those asset classes where the Notifying Parties overlap, is due
         to exogenous reasons which apply in a similar fashion to all of the asset classes in
         question. Second, the Commission, in a number of questions explicitly asked
         respondents to the market investigation to distinguish between different asset classes
         and contracts, if relevant,142 but practically no respondent made such a distinction.143
   (265) On the basis of the market investigation, the Commission therefore considers that the
         level of competitive constraint between ETDs and OTC derivatives is not substantially
         different for any of the asset classes concerned by this Decision. Therefore, the analysis
         below applies to all asset classes where the Notifying Parties' activities overlap.
                                 11.1.1.2.2.1.1.         Introduction
   (266) As already explained above, derivatives contacts are traded in two broad environments,
         namely on exchanges and OTC.144 The relative size of these two broad segments differs
         according to the way this size is measured. There are two recognised metrics used to
   139
           See for instance Notifying Parties' presentation at the Oral Hearing, 27 October 2011, slide 23.
   140
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraph 16.
   141
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Introduction, Annex I.3, Compass Lexecon
           Statistical Assessment of Market Investigation Questions.
   142
           In particular see question 11 of Q8 – questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, the above
           mentioned 'SSNIP test' question.
   143
           With reference to the 'SSNIP test' question, out of 56 replies, this is only the case for DekaBank
           Deutsche Girozentrale (response to question 11 of Q8 – questionnaire to customers on derivatives –
           Phase II: "Die Frage, welche Verhaltensweise gewählt wird, hängt von dem jeweiligen Produkt, dem
           Kundenwunsch und der Preissensibilität des jeweiligen Produktes ab. Daher ist eine eindeutige Antwort
           an dieser Stelle nicht möglich," [...]*) and HSBC Group (response to the same question: " Our reaction
           would depend on the contract being traded," [...]*). Barclays, instead, made reference to a difference in
           ETDs/OTC dynamics only for commodities (response to question 11 of Q8 – questionnaire to
           customers on derivatives – Phase II: "Generally, the venue for the trade is dictated by the client. In the
           commodities space, this would be product specific," [...]*).
           See also responses to question 3 of Q8 - questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, reading
           "Is there a certain category of underlyings for which you have a preference to trade OTC rather than
           on exchange? If so, please explain and provide examples". In this case, out of 72 responses, only 15 of
           the customers pointed to some different preferences within the different asset classes, and among them
           the majority referred to FX derivatives. In general, therefore, the "choice does not depend on
           underlying" (DZ Bank AG, response to question 3 of Q8 - questionnaire to customers on derivatives –
           Phase II, [...]*).
   144
           See paragraphs (224), (225) and (255) of this Decision.
EN                                                        53                                                          EN

         measure the size of derivatives markets, notional outstanding and notional turnover.
         Notional outstanding looks at the total value of all outstanding transactions de facto
         representing the cumulative total of past transactions while notional turnover measures
         the level of trade activity during a certain period145.
   (267) During the proceedings, the Notifying Parties claimed that close to 90% of derivatives
         contracts are traded OTC which in their view evidences that, should the exchanges
         attempt to exercise market power, derivatives users would have a myriad of
         opportunities to switch to derivatives available OTC.
   (268) It should first be noted that it does not follow that if the OTC market is significantly
         larger than the ETD market, then this in itself means that the OTC market imposes a
         competitive constraint on the ETD market. As explained in the sections below, the
         relative size of two markets or segments is not in itself determinative of the constraint
         one imposes on another, which is rather dependent on the inherent characteristics and
         uses of the products concerned. Without prejudice to this, the Commission notes that the
         Notifying Parties' claim would in any case only be valid if the relative size of the OTC
         and ETD markets were measured in terms of notional outstanding value. Indeed, as
         shown in the graphs in Figure 4, the OTC segment is much bigger than the ETD
         segment if notional values outstanding are compared. However, should the total
         notional turnover be used as a relevant measure, the OTC segment would be smaller
         than the ETD segment.
         Figure 4: Notional Outstanding and Turnover of OTC Derivatives and ETDs
        Source: TABB Group Study, The Global Risk Transfer market: Developments in OTC and Exchange-Traded
        Derivatives, November 2010, page 3.
   (269) Similarly, the graphs in Figure 5 show the same effect using a concrete example of
         interest rate derivatives. This difference is only logical as notional turnover measures
         the activity which is beyond doubt much more frequent on exchanges where
         instantaneous matching results in millions of daily transactions (meaning that the value
         of open positions is reduced) while notional value outstanding measures the value of
   145
           See Form CO, Derivatives, sections 6.66 and 6.67 of the.
EN                                                     54                                                  EN

         open positions, which in the OTC market are large and often open for several years. As
         concerns the relevance of the two measures, NYSE Euronext, contrary to its position in
         these proceedings, has previously considered that notional turnover value is more
         appropriate to evaluate economic utility of derivatives. "Although it is often cited that the
         value of contracts notionally outstanding in the OTC market is far larger than those
         processed via exchanges, it is less often noted that the turnover of contracts processed via
         exchanges is also far larger than that in the OTC market[...] The level of notional value
         turnover of a market is a better guide to its economic utility than the size of notional value
         outstanding."146
         Figure 5: Overall Notional Outstanding and Notional Turnover of Interest Rate
         Derivatives traded OTC and on exchange
        Source: NYSE Euronext, Response to the European Commission communication on a roadmap for ensuring efficient,
        safe and sound derivatives markets, July 2009, page 2.
   (270) Last but not least, to underline the importance of the ETD market, it should also be
         recalled that in terms of annual number of transactions, ETDs are much more liquid. For
         instance, in 2009, the OTC market accounted for 16 million transactions compared to 3
         billion transactions in ETDs.147
   146
           NYSE Euronext, Response to the European Commission communication on a roadmap for ensuring
           efficient, safe and sound derivatives markets, July 2009, page 2.
   147
           TABB Report, slide 23.
EN                                                            55                                                      EN

                               11.1.1.2.2.1.2.        There is a range of derivatives contracts from
                                   fully standardised ETDs on one side to customised OTC
                                   contracts on the other side
   (271) The decision opening the proceedings, on the basis of the results of the first phase market
         investigation, made a general distinction between ETDs and OTC derivatives based on the
         different level of standardisation of derivatives contracts, with ETDs being standardised
         derivatives contracts whereas OTC derivatives are bespoke contracts negotiated bilaterally
         away from exchanges.148 The Notifying Parties, in their response to the decision opening
         the proceedings, explained that 90-95% of OTC derivatives contracts are also standardised
         and hence that standardisation of derivatives contracts cannot be considered as a
         differentiating factor having implications for the definition of the relevant product market
         in this case.
   (272) The second phase market investigation confirmed the view of the Notifying Parties that
         there is a range of derivatives contracts from the most standardised highly liquid ETDs to
         fully customised OTC contracts. This is in line with the typical life cycle of derivatives
         contracts which are usually first introduced in the OTC environment on a customised and
         bilateral basis, then become more standardised to go first through voice broking and to
         ultimately reach the level of standardisation adapted for order book trading on exchanges.
         At this point, they are fully standardised, crucially, not only in their legal terms but also in
         all their economic parameters in order to achieve a concentration of liquidity in individual
         contracts. In this respect, one market participant noted that "Exchanges bring
         standardization to the ideas that are born OTC. Therefore the direction of product
         innovation is usually from OTC towards exchange."149 This is in line with findings in
         the TABB Study stating that “In fact, OTCDs and ETDs are complementary and
         symbiotic for product development; one is a primary source of innovation for the
         other.”150
   (273) From the standardisation/customisation point of view, the Commission considers that the
         spectrum of derivatives contracts can broadly speaking be characterised as follows:151
   (274) A first category of contracts are fully standardised contracts traded on exchanges' order
         books and cleared within the exchange's CCP. Given the inherent characteristics of
         exchange trading, the only contracts suitable for on-order book trading are contracts
         that are standardised in all of their economic parameters (such as the underlying,
         exercise date, strike price, exercise style, size of the lot, etc.) as well as their legal
         documentation. Due to this "absolute" standardisation, derivatives contracts traded on
         order book may achieve considerable volumes. Indeed, exchange trading is
         characterised by a relatively small number of contracts achieving high volumes152
   148
          Decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, paragraph 27.
   149
          Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with BNPP of 16 September 2011, [...]*.
   150
          TABB Report, slide 11.
   151
          See agreed minutes of a meeting with AFME of 24 August 2011, [...]*, and agreed minutes of meeting
          with LSE of 6 September 2011, [...]*, paragraphs 12-13.
   152
          See agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Goldman Sachs of 19 September 2011, [...]* where
          Goldman Sachs referred to an analysis showing that 90% of revenues of CME is achieved by 4
          contracts.
EN                                                     56                                                    EN

         allowing for instantaneous execution and the possibility to close the obtained exposure
         before the expiry date in an anonymous market.
   (275) The second category of contracts is based on the same underlying but traded in "block"
         sizes (namely large sizes). These contracts are negotiated bilaterally and then reported
         to exchange through an exchange's off-order book facilities and cleared. Such contracts
         cannot be traded onwards on an exchange's order book153. However, they are eligible
         for exchange clearing and become fully fungible and enter into a single margin pool
         with on-order book trades.
   (276) The third set of contracts is ETDs "copied" in the OTC market, so-called "ETD
         lookalikes". These contracts offer the same economic exposure as ETD contracts but
         are traded away from an exchange and not cleared by the exchanges' CCPs. They are
         usually cleared bilaterally. These contracts represent a small portion of all available
         contracts in the OTC environment154 and are principally designed for and by large
         banks in the interdealer market. These banks interact regularly and may have an interest
         to keep those entirely in the OTC environment away from the exchanges' CCPs. It
         follows that for this particular category of customers, these contracts might on occasion
         be directly substitutable for the same contracts within the first and second category.155
         Given the upcoming regulatory push for clearing of standardised OTC derivatives, this
         group will become smaller156.
   (277) A fourth category comprises contracts that are essentially offered in the same
         underlyings as derivatives traded on exchanges' order books but are customised in a
         number of economic parameters to achieve a better hedge for their customers. These are
         so-called "flex contracts". While these contracts cannot be traded on exchange order
         books, they are eligible for exchange clearing through facilities such as Bclear or OTC
         Flex. Although they are not fungible with the standardised contracts157, due to the high
         degree of correlation with the contracts traded on the order book,158 there is potential
         for cross-margining benefits.
   (278) A fifth broad category of contracts are "pure OTC" contracts that are customised and do
         not have to date an equivalent on exchange (for instance, interest rate swaps, credit
         default swaps, or more "exotic OTC" contracts like swaptions, etc). They are either
         bilaterally cleared or, when the degree of standardisation permits it, through a CCP
         dedicated to the instruments in question (such as SwapClear for standardised IRS and
         IceClear for CDS). This is the largest segment of contracts traded OTC.159
   153
          See Section 11.1.2 of this Decision for definition of off-order book services.
   154
          See Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.3 of this Decision.
   155
          See Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.3 of this Decision.
   156
          In Europe, this regulatory push will come from the Regulation on OTC Derivatives, Central Clearing
          Counterparties and Trade Repositories (EMIR) which will mandate CCP clearing of eligible OTC
          derivatives (COM(2010)484)).
   157
          With the exception of flex trades in standard maturities beyond the last listed maturity, which may
          become fungible at a future date when that maturity is first listed.
   158
          Two instruments are considered correlated when their prices move together over time. Correlation can
          be positive, when the prices move in the same direction, or negative, when the prices move in the
          opposite direction. Correlation between instruments is dynamic.
   159
          Agreed minutes of a meeting with AFME of 24 August 2011, [...]*; see also [...]*, response to question
          3 of questionnaire Q8- Questionnaire to customers, derivatives – Phase II [...]*.
EN                                                        57                                                     EN

   (279) The spectrum was described by DB in its White Paper as follows: "OTC derivatives cover
         a range from highly standardized (so-called "exchange look-alike") to tailor made
         contracts with individualized terms regarding underlying, contract size, maturity and
         other features […] Exchange-traded derivatives, on the other hand, are fully standardized
         and their contract terms are designed by derivatives exchanges."160
   (280) In their response to the SO and at the Oral Hearing, the Notifying Parties argued that
         over 90% of OTC derivatives are standardised and that this standardisation, combined
         with market and regulatory developments, will dramatically increase the competitive
         pressure that OTC derivatives exert on ETD trading.161According to the Notifying
         Parties, "all standardized OTC Contracts and not only ETD Lookalikes constrain ETD
         trading."162
   (281) To support their argument that increasing standardisation of OTC contracts makes these
         contracts substitutes to ETDs, the Notifying Parties refer to a consultation paper on
         standardisation and exchange trading of OTC derivatives drafted by the Committee of
         European Securities Regulators (CESR), where it stated that there is “significant
         standardization of credit derivatives, interest rate derivatives, and commodity
         derivatives. In each of these product classes, standard legal documentation,
         standardized contract terms and electronic post-execution confirmation services are in
         wide use and some products within each of these product classes are centrally cleared
         and traded on organized platforms”.163 It is, however, evident from the text that this
         statement by CESR does not concern standardisation of economic parameters, but only
         legal standardisation.
   (282) Indeed, while it is an observable phenomenon that even in the OTC world, there has
         been an ongoing trend towards standardisation, the rationale and the scope of
         standardisation in the OTC and ETD environment are very different. As concerns ETDs,
         full standardisation of all terms, in particular the economic parameters, is a prerequisite
         for exchange trading, whereas OTC derivatives are standardised in their legal terms for
         legal risk management reasons. The rationale for standardisation of OTC derivatives
         contracts therefore has been to minimise the legal and default risk associated with OTC
         trading, and to ensure that these contracts are processed until settlement in a more
         efficient manner, possibly via electronic means. As a result, the contractual terms of
         most164 traded OTC contracts have been subject to standardisation, in particular under
         the umbrella of the International Swaps and Derivatives Association ("ISDA").165
   160
           See Deutsche Boerse Group, White Paper, The Global derivatives Market – An Introduction, April
           2008, p.10, available at : http://www.scribd.com/doc/61304935/Global-Derivatives-Market (September
           2011).
   161
           See Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Introduction, paragraph 15.
   162
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Introduction, paragraph 70 et seq.
   163
           See Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Introduction, footnote 111.
   164
           See replies to questions 13 and 20 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers, derivatives – Phase II, showing
           the high percentage of OTC contracts based on ISDA contractual models. See also [...]*, reply to
           question 14 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers, derivatives – Phase II, [...]*: "The ISDA published
           MCA’s as described in our response to question 13 are the most common manner in which OTC equity
           derivatives are standardised within certain product groups ".
   165
           The International Swaps and Derivatives Association ("ISDA") is a trade organisation of participants in
           the market for OTC derivatives. ISDA develops and maintains standard derivatives documentation,
           which can be used, and is used, as a template for OTC transactions.
EN                                                        58                                                       EN

         However, this level of standardisation does not imply the standardisation of the key
         economic parameters166 which is necessary for a contract to be traded on the exchange
         order book: "The characteristics that are commonly standardised for a product group
         would be pay-offs, mechanisms for dividends and corporate action and related events
         and any related legal wording used to framework these. As is the nature of OTC
         products, trading parameters e.g. strike prices, notionals, tenor and such like are not
         standardised."167 Indeed, even most “standardised” OTC derivatives do not exclude a
         certain degree of customisation in the contract terms which is not the case for exchange
         traded derivatives which are fully standardised in all economic terms.
   (283) In this respect, inter-dealer broker ICAP168 recalled that "the ISDA terms operate as a
         framework within which OTC derivatives contracts can be concluded by providing
         "definitions" and formats that can be applied in a modular way by the parties to the
         contract. Crucially, however, they do not provide for standardization of the derivatives
         product itself. This is in contracts to ETDs, which are fully standardized in relation to
         all contract parameters, including economic terms, as they could otherwise be note
         traded on an exchange."169 The fact that OTC contracts may be standardised in their
         legal terms does not mean that derivatives users would switch from highly liquid ETDs
         to OTC derivatives, be they standardised or not. As explained below, OTC derivatives
         are used for different purposes than and in different circumstances to ETDs.
   (284) The Notifying Parties further argue that the mandatory clearing of standardised OTC
         derivatives will remove one of the only distinctions in how OTC and ETD products are
         traded which in their view will result in even more robust competition between these
         products.170 As concerns the implications of upcoming regulation, the Commission
         notes from the outset that the final shape of any legislative initiative currently subject to
         discussions in various fora is at this stage unclear, and hence any reliance on the
         content of various proposals would be speculative and inappropriate. However, should
         regulation indeed bring about convergence between ETDs and OTC derivatives in the
         sense that it would require standardised OTC derivatives to be subject to mandatory
         clearing, this would not imply that ETDs and OTC derivatives would become
         substitutable.171 On the contrary, the rationale and the numerous reasons (see above) for
         derivatives users to use OTC derivatives is unlikely to disappear.
   166
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with ISDA of 16 September 2011, [...]*, para. 4. For the
           definition of economic parameters, see above section 11.1.1.2.2.1.2 of this Decision.
   167
           [...]*, reply to question 14 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*. See also
           agreed minutes of conference call with RBS of 16 September 2011, paragraph 12 [...]*: "the ISDA
           agreements aim to standardise the legal terms of the contract rather then the key economic terms ".
   168
           See ICAP website, available at http://www.icap.com/, (January 2012).
   169
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 802/2004 implementing Council
           Regulation (EC) 139/2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings (the "Implementing
           Regulation"), 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.12.
   170
           See Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Introduction.
   171
           Rather, it would mean that due to regulatory requirements, it would become mandatory to trade some of
           the derivatives previously traded OTC on exchanges. As such, it would not alter the fundamental
           characteristics of OTC derivatives or ETDs nor the differences between them, but would rather shift the
           boundary between them.
EN                                                        59                                                           EN

   (285) In addition, the majority of the contracts in the OTC environment are swaps (interest
         rate swaps, credit default swaps and FX swaps)172, which by definition are very
         different instruments from options and futures and are not traded on exchanges. As will
         be explained in Section 11.1.1.2.2.2.1 b below, swaps, irrespective of the level of
         standardisation, are not substitutable to exchange-traded futures and options.
   (286) It follows from the above that there is a whole range of derivatives contracts responding to
         the whole spectrum of customers' needs. While OTC contracts may also be standardised,
         as has been outlined in this Section, this standardisation is of a different nature for OTC
         derivatives and ETDs. Moreover, there is a range of fundamental distinguishing features
         between ETDs and OTC, as is explained in the following Sections of this Decision.
                                 11.1.1.2.2.1.3.         Substitution between ETDs and OTC derivatives
                                      is at best limited
   (287) On the basis of the results of the market investigation in this Decision, the SO
         concluded that depending on the category of customers, there is either no substitution
         between highly standardised ETD contracts and OTC contracts, or that such
         substitution may be limited to a small category of contracts (so-called ETD
         lookalikes).173 Indeed, according to the results of the market investigation, there is on
         the one hand a distinguishable group of customers that have no mandates or operational
         set up to trade OTC derivatives and hence for whom OTC derivatives are not an
         alternative, and on the other hand a group of customers that trade both ETDs and OTC
         derivatives but who could potentially switch to OTC only for a small category of
         contracts. As a result, this lack of, or limited, substitution is due to exogenous factors
         such as the ability to trade over-the-counter or the needs at the time of trading.
   (288) The Notifying Parties in their response to the SO claim that the first category of ETD-
         only customers represents only a small portion of the market and that the second
         category of customers would switch to OTC if the merged entity were to attempt to
         exert market power post-transaction. 174 The Notifying Parties further argued that
         because they have no means to identify these customers, they cannot impose a price
         increase only on this category of customers.
                                 11.1.1.2.2.1.4.         Customers that can only trade ETDs
   (289) The first phase market investigation indicated that certain customers trade exclusively
         ETDs (on and off order book) and hence do not consider any contracts traded away from
         the regulated exchange environment (including "lookalike" contracts) as alternatives in
         their trading strategies.175
   172
           According to figures of BIS, over 70% of OTC notional amounts outstanding in June 2011 was
           represented      by    various     types    of     swaps.   See    BIS    website,     available    at
           http://www.bis.org/statistics/otcder/dt1920a.pdf, (November 2011).
   173
           See SO, section 1.2.3.2.
   174
           See Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraph 86ff and Notifying Parties'
           presentation at the Oral Hearing, 27 October 2011.
   175
           See replies to Q1 – Questionnaire to customers – Phase I, Q2 – questionnaire to investment firms and
           retail intermediaries – Phase I. For instance, "AMF only do exchange-traded equities and fixed income
           derivatives, due to internal regulations and policies", AMF Pension, response to question 11 of Q2 -
EN                                                         60                                                     EN

   (290) The second phase market investigation confirmed that there is indeed a category of
         derivatives users that can only hold ETDs in their portfolios or hedge their portfolios only
         with ETDs. These customers could not trade OTC derivatives even through a broker.
         These would include mainly retail investors, as well as some institutional market
         participants176 who may be prevented from using the OTC market for various reasons such
         as lack of mandate, an operational setup that can process only ETDs, risk management
         preference, accounting reasons and various internal limits on positions these users can take
         as well as their counterparty risk status.177 This explains why the quasi totality of the open
         interest in the OTC market is controlled by a small number of the largest broker-dealer
         banks.
   (291) The existence of customers trading only ETDs was also confirmed by the Association of
         Financial Markets in Europe, AFME, whose members are the largest banks serving
         precisely these customers. According to AFME, there are “many clients who simply
         cannot use OTC products, even if they were willing, as their mandates do not allow it –
         for example, in view of the heightened counterparty credit risk.”178 AFME stressed that
         “banks deal in the products that their clients want to use – it cannot be any other way;
         but [banks’] clients, in turn, have to operate within the constraints of the current
         market structure, which for many of them means the ETD universe.”179 This was also
         confirmed by one of the biggest broker-dealers Goldman Sachs explaining that some
         customers could not switch to the OTC market irrespective of the cost of trading on
         exchange: "there are some categories of contracts which GSI does not trade OTC, for
         instance when they hedge their own positions on exchange. However, if the cost of
         trade on exchange were to increase, GSI would consider trading more OTC. This is
         possible owing to GSI's size and position as a dealer. The more retail end of the market
         would not have this possibility and would have to continue trading only on exchange
         because they are not set up to trade in the OTC market. In reality, only a small subset
         of market participants has access to OTC, even though they constitute a greater
         volume."180
   (292) The Notifying Parties' internal documents also suggest that some more risk averse
         customers – for various reasons – may be more inclined, or only able, to trade on
         exchange: "The French market has benefited from a proportion of OTC business moving
         to the regulated exchanges, a trend which may continue if concerns about credit risk
         persist and if institutional investors continue to avoid OTC transactions. The fact that the
         French Market end users is dominated by traditional institutional investors rather than
           questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase I, [...]*; and "Since Carnegie
           Investment Bank does not trade OTC its [sic] always the only option to trade exchange traded
           contracts", Carnegie Investment Bank AB, reply to question 16 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers –
           Phase I, [...]*.
   176
           During the first phase market investigation, 45 customers indicated that they trade only ETDs. See
           replies to Q1 – Questionnaire to customers – Phase I and Q2 – questionnaire to investment firms and
           retail intermediaries – Phase I.
   177
           See replies to question 1 of Q8– Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II. See also agreed
           minutes of a meeting with AFME of 24 August 2011, paragraph 8, [...]*.
   178
           AFME’s presentation at the Oral Hearing, 29 October 2011, [...]*.
   179
           AFME’s presentation at the Oral Hearing, 29 October 2011, [...]*.
   180
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Goldman Sachs of 19 September 2011, paragraph 7 [...]*;
           see also SNS Securities NV, question 13 of Q1 "Otc is niet in scoop omdat de balans van SNS Sec. dit
           niet toelaat" [...]*.
EN                                                      61                                                        EN

         hedge funds may explain the greater resort to regulated markets in France in comparison
         to other market places. Eurex has not benefited from a similar shift in volume from the
         OTC market."181 Similarly, another market participant explained that when they trade as a
         broker on behalf of their buy-side customers, they only trade ETDs. "For our customers
         we only trade exchange-listed derivatives. Our customers have made this choice given the
         transparency of exchange-listed products and the end-of-day calculation and revaluation
         process for the portfolios related to the NAV [Net Asset Value] calculations".182
   (293) Retail investors who do not trade OTC derivatives contracts are mainly active in the
         trading of equity derivatives, representing a share of 50% of trading of single equity
         derivatives and 20% of trading of equity index derivatives.183 While this represents only
         around 1% in terms of notional amount outstanding184 of all derivatives (globally for all
         asset classes) traded, it represents a significant portion of the Notifying Parties'
         revenues.185
   (294) The second phase market investigation confirmed that the group of customers who trade
         only ETDs are unlikely to switch to OTC products in response to a 5-10% increase in the
         overall cost of trading for ETDs on exchange.186 For the purposes of this analysis, the
         relevant group of customers has been constituted by including all187 those respondents
         who consistently declared both in the first and second phase market investigation that
         they trade only ETDs.188 Among those respondents, only one customer indicated that it
         would consider switching to OTC as one of the possible reactions to a price increase and
         only if that would make economic sense.189 In contrast, virtually all190 the other customers
   181
           NYX's internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Business
           Report to Euronext Supervisory Board, 30 November 2009, p. 8.
   182
           SNS, response to question 11 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers, [...]* Translated to English from
           Dutch, original: "Wij handelen alleen beursgenoteerde derivaten voor onze clienten. Onze clienten
           hebben hiervoor gekozen vanwege de transparantie in beurs genoteerde producten en de einde dag
           calculatie en herwaarderings proces voor de portefeuilles ivm NAV berekeningen". See also response
           by [another customer]* to the same question stating [...]*: "We have a preference for visible order
           books so we trade only on exchange."
   183
           See Deutsche Boerse Group, White Paper, The Global derivatives Market – An Introduction, p.6
           footnote 3 referring to data of International Options Markets Association 2006, available at :
           http://www.scribd.com/doc/61304935/Global-Derivatives-Market (September 2011).
   184
           The notional amount outstanding measures the cumulative value of all open contracts for OTC-traded
           derivatives or all open positions held against the central counterparty for exchange-traded derivatives.
   185
           According to the information provided in the Form CO, […]*% and […]*% of Eurex 2010 revenues
           and […]*% and […]*% of NYX' 2010 revenues came from equity index derivatives and single equity
           derivatives respectively. It follows that a non-insignificant proportion of the Notifying Parties' overall
           revenues comes from retail customers.
   186
           See replies to questionnaires Q1- Questionnaire to customers – Phase I and Q8 – Questionnaire to
           customers – derivatives – Phase II.
   187
           Overall 13 respondents indicated both in the first phase and in the second phase that they trade only
           ETDs.
   188
           In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties contested that the Commission has not included in the
           group of customers who only trade ETD Caixa D'Estalvis i Pensions de Barcelona ("Caixa"), despite
           the fact that it stated that it traded only ETDs in its response to question 7 of Q1 Questionnaire to
           customers – Phase I. Nevertheless, it should be noted that Caixa during the second phase market
           investigation stated that it traded both ETDs and OTC (see Caixa, response to question 2 of Q8 –
           Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II [...]*): therefore, given this inconsistency, Caixa
           has not been included in the Commission's analysis of the group of customers trading only ETD.
   189
           DZ Privatbank SA, response to question 11 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers – derivatives – Phase II
           [...]*. In this context, it should be recalled that given that most liquidity of ETDs is on exchange, it is
EN                                                          62                                                         EN

         who stated that they trade only ETDs and replied to this question indicated that they would
         either continue trading on exchange, or switch to another exchange or MTF if available,
         and that in any event, OTC would not be an option.191
   (295) The Notifying Parties do not contest that this category of customers exists. However, the
         Notifying Parties claim that this group is small in size and cannot be identified by
         exchanges and hence discriminated against.192 In this context, the Notifying Parties
         strongly contested, both in their response to the SO and at the Oral Hearing, the
         Commission's analysis of switching behaviour of this group of customers as being based
         on a statistically insignificant sample and therefore not robust. In this regard the
         Commission notes that while the sample of these customers is relatively limited, the
         responses provide a clear indication that this group of customers is reluctant or unable to
         switch to OTC.193
   (296) In addition, the Notifying Parties criticised the market investigation question which asked
         about these customers' switching behaviour in response to a 5-10% price increase194 for
         two main reasons. The first criticism raised by the Notifying Parties was that the question
         was misleading as it did not specify that the hypothetical price increase is applicable to all
         exchanges and offered as response switching to another exchange. In this respect, the
         Commission considers that the fact that the respondents had the opportunity to state that
         they would switch to another exchange does not affect their response that they would not
         switch to OTC. Indeed, the respondents were allowed and did tick several responses as
           unlikely that trading the same contract OTC would make economic sense. See analysis in section
           11.1.1.2.2.1.5 c. of this Decision.
   190
           Altogether 11 customers.
   191
           See replies to question 11 of Q8– Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase 2. In addition
           Liquid Capital Management in its response to question 11 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on
           derivatives – Phase II replied "other reaction", but stated that "[o]ur decisions in relation to trading
           venue(s) are heavily dependent on where the open interest and the liquidity lie"[...]*.
   192
           See Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraph 88 and Annex I.3.
   193
           In this regard it should be noted that during the second phase market investigation, the Commission sent
           121 questionnaires to customers (Q8 questionnaire to customers on derivatives) and received 88 replies.
           Of those replies, 55 had informative content in response to the switching question. Among those
           respondents, 13 belong to the group of customers who only trade ETD and 11 stated that they would not
           switch in response to a 5 to 10% increase of the overall cost of trading. As mentioned above in Recital
           (294), the group of customers who only trade ETD has been constituted by including all those
           respondents who consistently declared both in the first and second phase market investigation that they
           trade only ETDs.
           Nonetheless, the same picture on switching behaviour is drawn when considering the replies to
           Question 11 by those customers who declared to trade only ETDs during the second phase market
           investigation, despite this categorisation could not be inferred from their reply to Q1- Questionnaire to
           customers – Phase I. Of those 7 customers, 6 replied that, they would either continue trading the
           contract on exchange, or switch to another exchange or MTF if available or abandon the trade in
           response to 5-10% increase in the overall cost of trading for ETDs, while only 1 replied "Other
           reaction", clarifying that it would depend on the behaviour of its customers.
   194
           Question 11 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II ("Question 11") reads
           "Imagine a situation where, for derivatives contracts you usually trade on exchange, the total cost of
           trading these contracts on exchange were to increase by say 5-10%. Please explain what would be your
           most likely reaction, distinguishing as relevant between different asset classes and contracts: I would
           continue trading the contracts on exchange / I would trade the contract on another exchange or MTF
           platform / I would switch to OTC execution mode / I would abandon the trade/ Other reaction (please
           specify). Please provide further explanation in the following box."
EN                                                         63                                                        EN

         relevant.195 The second criticism of the Notifying Parties is that the question “can create
         bias because respondents find it difficult to conceptualize the price increase” and
         therefore the price increase should have been expressed in absolute amounts. First, it
         should be noted that for reasons already explained in this Decision and in particular the
         difficulties associated with a precise determination of the overall cost of trading including
         explicit and implicit components, it would not have been possible to ask such a question
         using absolute numbers. Second, this criticism is in direct contrast with the Notifying
         Parties’ claim throughout these proceedings that their customers are mainly large
         sophisticated financial institutions that are extremely price-sensitive and could pre-empt
         any attempt at an exercise of market power. In this context, the Commission does not
         consider it likely that these sophisticated customers were not able to “conceptualize the
         price increase”.
   (297) Many customers who have a clear preference to trade ETD or are only able to do so are not
         direct exchange members but use a broker to execute their trades on exchange. As a result,
         the Notifying Parties argue that they are not in a position to identify these customers and
         hence charge them different prices. However, it should be noted that within the
         Commission's sample of the group of customers who only trade ETDs, on which the
         above conclusions are based, 12196 out of the 13 respondents were direct exchange
         members of one or both the Notifying Parties' derivatives exchanges. It follows that at
         least some portion of customers that trade only ETDs are direct exchange members and
         therefore can be identified by the exchanges.
   (298) The market investigation and an analysis of the Notifying Parties' internal documents
         clearly demonstrates that exchanges can and do exploit different price sensitivities of their
         customers and compete for more price sensitive customers by granting them discounts.
         For instance, an NYX internal document reveals the discount strategy being clearly
         targeted at price-sensitive customers: […]*197
   (299) The ability of exchanges to price discriminate between various customer types is also
         evidenced by the ability of exchanges to apply different transaction fees to liquidity
         providers and to liquidity takers. Moreover, exchanges are able to apply different fees
         depending on whether the trade is executed on behalf of a client or for an exchange
         member's own account. For instance, an example of pricing of Dutch stock options on
         Liffe is telling in this regard. Indeed, in the case of Dutch stock options, a member
         would be charged a trading fee of Euro 0.15 per lot (with a maximum fee per order of
         Euro 80) if the execution is for its own account, compared to Euro 0.75 per lot (with a
         maximum fee per order of Euro 160) if the trade is executed on behalf of a client. This
         indicates different price elasticities of different types of clients, which are likely caused
         by the lower ability of certain customers to switch to alternative solutions and substitute
         away from the exchange. While the Notifying Parties claim that they are unable to
         identify the final customer on behalf of whom a broker is acting, they know that these
         clients are willing to trade for a higher fee.
   195
           Five customers stated that they would switch to another exchange if available which indicates that they
           would continue trading on exchange.
   196
           [...]*.
   197
           NYX's internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, NYSE Liffe –
           Global Derivatives Strategy, June 2009, p.14.
EN                                                       64                                                        EN

   (300) While the Commission was unable to determine the exact proportion of these customers or
         the corresponding revenue that can be attributed to these customers owing to the fact that
         the Notifying Parties were unable to provide this information, this category of customers is
         clearly distinguishable and price inelastic due to their inability to switch to OTC
         derivatives contracts because of the objective non price-related reasons explained above.
         Moreover, the market investigation has strongly suggested that this segment of demand
         has already increased significantly since the collapse of Lehman Brothers and greater
         awareness of potential counterparty risk generally associated with OTC derivatives, and is
         anticipated to continue to grow in importance under the regulatory capital rules of Basel
         III and pipeline Union legislation, as described below in Section 11.2.3.2.4.
   (301) This group of customers therefore comprises both direct and indirect exchange customers.
         In the case of indirect customers, the demand is presented to the exchange through a direct
         customer and the exchange may indeed, as the Notifying Parties argue, be unable to
         determine with certainty the origin of individual trades and discriminate on this basis.
         However, as shown in the example of Dutch stock options above, this group of customers
         is automatically charged a higher fee than direct customers.
   (302) It follows that the Notifying Parties' argument that they are unable to price-discriminate
         does not stand. This is for at least two main reasons. Firstly, the Notifying Parties are
         likely to be largely aware of the client base of their direct customers since this is
         determined by the commercial focus of each of those customers, with certain customers
         more typically serving the types of investor or user which is price inelastic. Secondly, the
         Notifying Parties can charge a price to each direct customer, when trading on client
         account, which reflects the trade-off between rents achievable against price inelastic end
         users and potential lost revenue from those who are more (albeit still not necessarily very)
         price elastic and might therefore, at the margins, make greater use of OTC.
   (303) Therefore, it is concluded for the purpose of this Decision that there is an identifiable
         group of users which would not and/or could not switch to OTC derivatives should the
         overall cost of trading for ETDs, and the trading and clearing fees in particular, increase
         by a small but significant non-transitory increase in price post-merger. Because the
         exchanges have the ability to apply, and do apply, differentiated fees and discounts to
         different exchange customers, the merged entity will have the ability and incentive to
         increase the overall price of trading and clearing for these users who would not and/or
         could not switch to OTC derivatives. It will be able to do so directly where the inability
         or unwillingness to switch concerns the direct exchange member itself, as well as
         indirectly where the inability or unwillingness to switch concerns a significant part of
         the final demand routed to the exchange through the direct exchange member, by
         increasing the prices payable by the direct member which then will pass some or all of
         this increase through in turn to its own customers.198
   198
           As explained in the following sections, the findings of this Decision with relation to market definition
           are not dependent on there being a separate category of customers which trade only ETDs.
EN                                                       65                                                         EN

                                  11.1.1.2.2.1.5.         Customers that trade both ETDs and OTC
                                      derivatives
                a. Introduction
   (304) The majority of derivatives trades are executed by direct customers of the exchange which
         have access to and trade both ETDs and OTC derivatives, even if they may not have a
         mandate to do so on behalf of all of their own customers.199 As concerns this category of
         customers, the SO concluded that any substitution for these customers, when trading on
         own account or on the account of a client which is able to trade both categories, would be
         limited to so-called ETD lookalikes. This is because derivatives users use ETDs and OTC
         derivatives for different purposes and as complementary tools in their trading strategies.
   (305) Contrary to what the Notifying Parties have claimed during the proceedings, the fact that a
         particular set of customers trades ETDs and OTC derivatives in parallel does not in itself
         mean that these products compete or are in the same product market. Instead, as will be
         explained below, in this case, such parallel use rather points towards complementarity of
         the two sets of instruments.
   (306) In their reply to the decision opening the proceedings, the Notifying Parties indicated that
         "traders regularly substitute between OTC and exchange-trading of derivatives."200
         However, the results of the Commission's market investigation did not confirm such
         substitution and rather showed a different picture.
   (307) While the first and second phase market investigation indicated that traders use both ETDs
         and OTC derivatives, ETDs (if any) could potentially be substituted only by a limited
         portion of OTC derivatives, ETD lookalikes. This is because a significant majority of
         OTC contracts are used for different purposes and in different circumstances than ETDs
         and cannot therefore substitute an ETD contract. Moreover, ETDs represent products in
         which identical contracts are held by a wide variety of market participants, making it
         significantly easier to exit positions during the lifetime of the contract, and do not require
         individual credit assessments as they benefit from elimination of counterparty risk by the
         exchange CCP.
   (308) The exchange and OTC trading environments coexist and provide complementary
         solutions to the trading community. Also, the market investigation and the analysis of the
         Notifying Parties' internal documents indicated that any interaction between ETDs and
         OTC derivatives is uni-directional whereby there is an increasing tendency of moving
         contracts from the OTC environment to the exchange environment when said contracts
         become more liquid. This does not, however, imply that the contracts traded in these two
         environments are substitutes as suggested by the Notifying Parties.
   199
           Indeed, the first phase market investigation in the present case revealed that the majority of the Notifying
           Parties' customers trade both ETDs and OTC derivatives. See replies to Q1 – Questionnaire to customers
           – Phase I and Q2 – questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase I. See also
           minutes of conference call with BNPP of 16 September 2011, paragraph 5 [...]*: "Some customers, for
           instance some funds, have an operational setting whereby they trade only listed products. These
           customers represent a small proportion of BNPP's customer base".
   200
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, Derivatives
           market definition, paragraph 14ff.
EN                                                         66                                                           EN

   (309) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties claimed that they face large powerful
         customers who are dealers in the OTC market and would switch to OTC trading if the
         merged entity were to attempt to exert market power. In this respect, the Notifying
         Parties criticise the Commission's analysis for focussing on customers' current trading
         strategies and not analyzing in a forward-looking manner whether customers would be
         more inclined to switch should a price increase occur post-merger.201
                 b. Only ETD lookalikes could in some circumstances be considered as directly
                      substitutable to listed products
   (310) The second phase market investigation sought to assess the extent to which there exist
         contracts traded OTC that would provide identical exposure as ETDs. The market
         investigation showed that within each asset class, it could be possible to identify a small
         portion of OTC contracts that offer the same economic exposure. This is the third
         category of contracts referred to in the spectrum of derivatives contracts described in
         Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.2, the ETD lookalikes.
   (311) In this regard, while the market investigation showed that ETD and OTC derivatives are
         generally not substitutable,202 certain market participants may, in some circumstances,
         opt for a lookalike product instead of an ETD.203 In this respect, one market participant
         noted that "in some instances, for equities derivatives, from an economic risk
         perspective OTC and ETD instruments can be exactly the same and are therefore
         directly substitutable. However, in the majority of cases, where clients have non-
         standard terms, structural or margining requirements, the contracts are not
         substitutable."204 Likewise, another market participant explained that OTC contracts
         "will be substitutable if they are carbon copy exchange lookalikes e.g. maturity
         date/strike etc and hence can be netted off cleanly against an exchange traded option.
         Non-standard maturities / strikes / exercise conditions would be non substitutable."205
   201
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction.
   202
           As regards the result of the market investigation on this point, see section 11.1.1.2.2.1.3 of this
           Decision.
   203
           See replies to question 17 of Q8– Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, showing that,
           while the slight majority of the respondents would always prefer an ETD to an OTC lookalike ETD (for
           instance, All other factors being equal, [a look-alike ETD] would not be an option" also for B. Metzler
           seel. Sohn & Co KGaA, response to question 17 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives –
           Phase II, […]*), some of them would opt for ETD lookalike derivatives instead of ETD. See also [...]*,
           response to question 11 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*: "Generally, we believe
           there are very few OTC products that can be viewed as substitutes for exchange-traded versions, since
           ETDs are standard in nature (with respect to expiry dates and payoffs) whereas the majority of OTC
           products are structured and non-standard in nature, often reflecting bespoke exposure designed for a
           particular client’s needs. The only OTC products we view as somewhat substitutable to ETDs are
           ‘listed look-alikes’, which are OTC options similar in nature to Exchange-traded equivalents. We may
           trade a listed look-alike product where a client wishes to gain exposure to an OTC product rather than
           trade on exchange – either because the listed look-alike has a difference to the ETD equivalent that the
           client prefers (for instance different strike price) or for reasons of reducing potential market impact
           (since not impacting exchange volumes directly)".
   204
           [...]*, response to question 16 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II [...]*.
   205
           Liquid Capital Management LLP, response to question 16 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on
           derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
EN                                                         67                                                       EN

   (312) This is also recognised by a DB internal document which states that "Products can be
         traded OTC or on-exchange by customer decision. Intensity of competitive relationship
         depends on degree of substitutability on product level – the more look-alike products
         are, the higher is any potential substitutation (sic)."206 Indeed, from a customer's point
         of view, while, generally speaking, he may have a choice to trade either on exchange or
         OTC, the real choice exists only to the extent that substitutable products are available in
         the two environments. Therefore, only to the extent that there is an exchange lookalike
         available OTC and offering the same economic exposure as ETD contracts, would there
         potentially be competition between the listed product and this concrete OTC product for
         customers that can trade both.
   (313) The Notifying Parties in their response to the SO and at the Oral Hearing claimed that
         any ETD can be at any time created in the OTC environment and hence should the
         merged entity attempt to exert market power, this would prompt traders to trade ETDs
         over-the-counter.207 While this is true in theory, such a strategy would lack a solid
         economic rationale. Indeed, small size trades that are characteristic for ETDs could
         hardly be executed at the same total cost in the OTC environment where the pool of
         potential counterparties for such trades is by definition limited. An analogy could be
         drawn between buying a suit off the store rack and having exactly the same suit tailor-
         made. While both methods may result in the same suit being purchased, the costs of
         obtaining it in the store and at the tailor are not the same.
   (314) In addition, it should be noted that because the liquidity in listed contracts is
         concentrated on exchanges (which translates in low bid-ask spreads and hence low cost
         of trading), the incentives of customers to trade these contracts away from exchanges
         are limited. This has been clearly explained by a market participant who outlined that
         "the primary determinant between different trade alternatives is the value and liquidity
         at the time of trade. If the economics of the trade are similar, and initial connectivity to
         an exchange has been established, on-exchange trading is generally easier. On that
         basis we would generally choose an on-exchange trade rather than a “look-alike” OTC
         contract."208 Further substantiation in this regard was provided by another market
         participant who indicated that "For highly liquid ETD comparable OTC markets
         normally do not exist."209 Indeed, this is because under normal circumstances, there is
         no economic rationale for copying these contracts OTC.
   (315) It follows that only in specific situations where OTC trading may confer a real added
         value to the customer may the customers decide to trade lookalikes instead of the
         product traded on exchange. In this regard, a market participant outlined that "[t]here
         may be preference for a listed look-alike contract where it is important to minimise
         market impact on a large or sensitive trade, or where it is important to customise some
         aspect of the contract (‘look-alikes’ are not necessarily identical to their ETD
         equivalent), and where the counterparties are able to trade OTC derivatives."210 For
   206
           DB internal document, […]*.
   207
           Notifying Parties’ response to SO, Introduction, paragraph 73.
   208
           Barclays, response to questions 7 and 17 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II,
           [...]*. But see more in general the replies to question 17 of Q8– Questionnaire to customers on
           derivatives – Phase II, highlighting liquidity as the key factor in the customers' choice.
   209
           DZ Bank, reply to question 16 of Q1 - Questionnaire to customers - Phase I, [...]*.
   210
           [...]*, response to question 17 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
EN                                                         68                                                     EN

         instance, some customers may prefer trading a contract that could be traded on order
         book away from exchanges if they can trade at better conditions than on exchange, for
         instance without having to post collateral. This may be the case if dealers have a long-
         standing relationship of trust allowing them to trade without worrying about the
         counterparty risk.211
   (316) The results of the market investigation show that trading of ETD lookalikes represents a
         relatively limited phenomenon.212 This is because the value proposition of the OTC
         trading environment is very different and resides in the ability to offer a tailor-made
         contract that would constitute a perfect hedge to any kind of risk as opposed to the
         business model of exchanges which offers deep liquidity in a small subset of
         contracts.213
   (317) ICAP in this respect indicated that ETD lookalikes represent a "very small minority of
         products, namely for some types of equity and some commodity derivatives. For other
         types of products, such as interest rate, […], the ETD and OTC contracts simply would
         not offer the same type of exposure even if it were taken out for the same period. This is
         because, fundamentally, ETDs have a maximum duration for three months (even though
         the future may be for a longer period) as they technically end every quarter with a
         single payment and/or delivery obligation and in many cases a different underlying
         asset. This means that the "outcome" of an ETD (even if for the same period and same
         underlying) would be different to that of an OTC."214 AFME stated that the proportion
         of ETD lookalikes is circa [0-5%]* of the overall OTC market.215 In addition, the
         majority of customers216 indicated that the proportion of ETD lookalikes ranges from 0
   211
           See BNP Paribas' response to questions 7 and 17 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives –
           Phase II, [...]*, explaining that in the interdealer market, lookalikes are cheaper because the relationship
           between dealers is on a level playing field (most often no initial margin). Similarly, Goldman Sachs, in
           agreed minutes of a teleconference call of 19 September 2011, [...]* outlined that: "As concerns
           contracts that are available OTC and which copy the contracts on exchange ('lookalikes'), GSI does not
           believe that these are a widespread phenomenon. Market participants would usually turn to exchanges
           for these transactions unless they could for example make savings on posting less collateral when
           trading OTC."
   212
           AFME stated that the proportion of ETD lookalikes is circa [0-5%]*% of the overall OTC market. See
           agreed minutes of a meeting with AFME of 24 August 2011, [...]*. See replies to question 20 of Q8 -
           Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, where the majority of respondents (9 out of 14
           respondents that replied to this question) indicated that the proportion of look-alike ETDs ranges from 0
           to 15 % of the overall OTC market: for example, Caixa D'Estalvis i Pensions de Barcelona, in reply to
           this question [...]*, outlined that look-alike ETDs would amount to 2 % of interest rate derivatives;
           similarly ICAP replied to the same question that look-alike ETDs represent "In interest rates, est. 2%
           (ie 2% of FRA business is IMM FRAs that are equivalent to STIRs). In equity derivatives est 10%",
           [...]*; [...]* referred that in equity derivatives look-alike ETDs represent 15% of the overall OTC
           market. [...]*, in reply to question 18 of Q8– Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*,
           also mentioned that "In Europe, look-alikes will exist, but they are not widely traded". See also agreed
           minutes of a teleconference call with BNPP of 16 September 2011, [...]*, mentioning that "there is a
           small portion of OTC derivatives that copies the listed products, so called ETD lookalikes".
   213
           See agreed minutes of a meeting with BATS of 26 August 2011, [...]*: "While ETDs are designed as
           highly liquid standardized contracts, OTC derivatives are attractive only insofar as they allow for
           customization of contracts."
   214
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.14 [...]*.
   215
           See agreed minutes of a meeting with AFME of 24 August 2011, [...]*.
   216
           A total of 9 out of 14 respondents that replied to the question 20 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers on
           derivatives – Phase II.
EN                                                           69                                                         EN

         to 15% of the overall OTC market. For example, Caixa D'Estalvis i Pensions de
         Barcelona, in reply to this question, outlined that ETD lookalikes would amount to 2%
         of interest rate derivatives;217 similarly, ICAP replied to the same question that ETD
         lookalikes represent "In interest rates, est. 2% (ie 2% of FRA business is IMM FRAs
         that are equivalent to STIRs). In equity derivatives est 10%".218 [One large customer]*
         specified that "In Europe, lookalikes will exist, but they are not widely traded".219
         Another large customer specified that "there is a small portion of OTC derivatives that
         copies the listed products, so called ETD lookalikes".220 ICAP further explains that "the
         types of asset classes for which there can be ETD "lookalikes" are extremely limited
         and only form a very small part of the derivatives sphere."221
   (318) Lastly, it should be noted that even to the extent that there are contracts offering the
         same economic exposure in the OTC market, the counterparty, the operational, the legal
         and the liquidity risks on exchange and in the OTC market vary significantly and are
         likely to induce users to prefer exchange trading.222 In this respect, in its White Paper
   217
           Reply to question 20 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
   218
           Reply to question 20 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
   219
           Reply to question 18 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
   220
           See also agreed minutes of a teleconference call with BNPP of 16 September 2011, [...]*.
   221
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.14 […]*.
   222
           See replies to question 6 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II. In its reply to
           this question, [...]* FOA provided an extensive analysis of the differences in operational, legal and
           liquidity risks associated with ETDs and OTC derivatives: "Operational risks in OTC transactions tend
           to be higher, reflecting the counterparty-to-counterparty nature of the transaction, but significant
           increases in post-trade efficiency in back offices of firms and the availability of using exchanges and
           CCPs to manage post-trade processing and clearing have generated a major improvement, to the point
           where, while there are a number of variables in terms of the nature of the risk, the level of risk is
           broadly the same as between well-run OTC dealing counterparties and well-run exchanges.
           The legal risks between exchange-traded contracts and OTC contracts are rather more significant and
           this will vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, and is usually dependent upon the extent to which a
           particular jurisdiction will allow contracts to be traded off-exchange. It is noteworthy that MiFID, in
           the EU, specifically provided for equity contracts to be traded off-exchange, subject to meeting certain
           minimum regulatory requirements, regarding transparency, etc. There is also the additional legal risk
           that the constitutional documents of some end-users may restrict the use of OTC contracts.
           The biggest difference is the degree of credit risk applicable to the dealings, insofar as – while there is
           now a strong regulatory drive to encourage OTC contracts to be CCP cleared – non-standardised OTC
           contracts which are not capable of being CCP cleared will depend upon the creditworthiness of the
           executing counterparty, whereas the credit risk of exchange-traded contracts and CCP-cleared OTC
           derivatives will be significantly less because of CCP clearing have the credit risk mitigated largely
           through the use of CCP clearing. It is important to note, however, that the credit risk of the customer
           will, in the vast majority of cases, still be with the customer’s intermediary, irrespective of whether it is
           an exchange-traded contract or an OTC contract.
           Market and liquidity risk will be largely dependent upon the degree of volume, depth and liquidity of
           the market will vary from market to market and is less a variable between OTC and exchange-traded
           markets.
           Another form of risk is valuation risk, which will depend upon the degree of price transparency
           applicable to a relevant contract and the availability of price benchmarks. This will vary as between
           exchange-traded contracts, which are wholly transparent with a well-structured central price-formation
           process and OTC contracts, which can be less transparent (although that is likely to change with the
           introduction of EMIR in the EU) leading to difficulties in valuing highly-tailored or structured
           contracts".
           More specifically as regards ETD lookalikes, see [...]*, response to question 15 of Q1 – questionnaire to
           customers – Phase I, [...]*: "OTC ‘listed look-alike’ products can be viewed as substitutes to their ETD
EN                                                           70                                                          EN

         on derivatives, DB came to the conclusion that the scale of aggregated credit risk varies
         significantly between the OTC and exchange segments, and is approximately 4 times
         larger OTC than on exchange, with operational risk events occurring more often OTC,
         legal risk being comparable in the two segments thanks to ISDA standard agreements,
         and liquidity risk higher OTC than on-exchange (as shown by the high liquidity of the
         exchange segment even throughout the recent economic crisis).223 In a similar vein, a
         customer indicated during the second phase market investigation that "while it is
         possible to create OTC contracts that 'look-alike' for most ETD instruments
         (particularly for short-term rates and equities except where exclusivity in e.g. Equity
         Index products constraints choice), the different pricing, processing including
         collateral/margining balance sheet impact mean that only a few are seamlessly
         substitutable."224
   (319) It follows from the above that at best some customers, principally large interdealer
         banks, could under certain circumstances substitute some exchange-traded contracts,
         principally options,225 with ETD lookalikes. Given that the economics of replicating an
         ETD contract in the OTC environment provides little justification for such a strategy,
         due, inter alia, to the fact that liquidity for the ETDs in question has settled on the
         Notifying Parties' exchanges226, the phenomenon of ETD lookalikes is and will be very
         limited.
           equivalents, and can be created and traded for (in theory) any ETD. However, they are not directly
           substitutable, in that they differ with respect to the credit risk, market impact, price, speed, liquidity and
           other factors involved in the trade – as discussed in answer to question 15 and subsequently". Finally,
           at the Oral Hearing when asked to explain why banks would decide to put liquidity on exchanges at all
           and what would be the drivers of such decision, the Notifying Parties replied that the banks "decide to
           put liquidity on exchange because it is where the best price and best liquidity is. It's an open and
           transparent market, on a screen, they can see the complete depth of the prices, it's where the tight bid-
           offer spread is".
   223
           See Deutsche Boerse Group, White Paper, The Global derivatives Market – An Introduction, April
           2008,                  p.24-25,                  available                 at:                http://deutsche-
           boerse.com/mr/binary/0A4A6E3F8ED836BDC1257457002D5669/$File/2008-
           04%20DB_WP%20GlobalDerivativesMarket_e.pdf?OpenElement (viewed on 26 January 2012).
   224
           UBS, response to question 18 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers – derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
   225
           The same does not apply for futures. As explained by BNPP, agreed minutes of conference call of 16
           September 2011, [...]*, "As concerns BNPP's hedging needs, listed products are indispensable and
           could not be replaced by any OTC contract. This is because trading OTC needs to be complemented by
           listed products which are used to hedge the delta position. While some hedging is also done in the OTC
           market, it is not substitutable to that done on exchange. To hedge its delta positions and to cover the
           balance of the risk, BNPP buys and sells futures every minute. This can be done only on exchange
           where the order book has a high liquidity in these products. The same strategy would be very onerous
           OTC as it is a voice market where finding the counterparty for this type of contract is very difficult and
           thus impossible to perform on a regular basis in the same way as is done on exchange. For these
           transactions, which represent 80% of BNPP's trades, there is nowhere else to go even if the fees to
           trade listed products were to increase substantially. As concerns options, there would be less of a
           problem as hedging is more static (no trades every minute). This difference is also evidenced by the fact
           that trading fees for futures are more expensive than options because the exchanges (such as Eurex and
           NYSE) leverage the lack of alternatives for the clients."
   226
           This has been also acknowledged by the Notifying Parties at the Oral Hearing when they stated that
           banks "decide to put liquidity on exchange because it is where the best price and best liquidity is. It's an
           open and transparent market, on a screen, they can see the complete depth of the prices, it's where the
           tight bid-offer spread is." See recording of Oral Hearing, 27 October, afternoon 03:02:20
EN                                                           71                                                           EN

   (320) Furthermore, proposed regulatory developments are likely to require all or substantially
         all of the ETD lookalikes in question to be traded or at least cleared on exchange (see
         further Section 11.2.3.2.4 below), at which point, if the envisaged regulatory changes
         are enacted, substitutability will be excluded entirely for all categories of customers.
               c. The majority of ETDs could not be substituted by OTC contracts as OTC
                    contracts generally have different characteristics and fulfil different needs
   (321) ETDs and OTC derivatives have fundamentally different characteristics in terms of,
         notably, average trade size, market participants, trading strategies, clearing arrangements,
         costs and legal risks. They each have their own reason to exist as they cater to different
         customer needs.
   (322) ETDs are characterised by frequent trades in relatively small sizes whilst OTC derivatives
         trades are less frequent but of much bigger size. In this respect, an OTC trading platform,
         ICAP, indicated that "it would be rare to have an interest rate swap for an amount less
         than EUR20m."227 This is evidenced by average trade sizes executed on exchange and
         OTC. For instance, as concerns a vanilla228 interest rate derivative, the average trade size
         of interest rate futures on exchange is EUR 100 000 per lot229 with a normal execution of 5
         lots while the average size of an OTC vanilla interest rate swap is EUR 200 million.230 It
         follows that a normal size OTC interest rate swap could not realistically be executed on an
         exchange.231
   (323) The chart below in Figure 6 shows the average trade size for fixed income derivatives
         executed on Eurex and on ICAP's platform.
   227
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.18 [...]*.
   228
           Vanilla, as opposed to exotic, refers to a simple derivative contract within a category.
   229
           Minimum number of contracts that can be traded.
   230
           LSE, response to question 5 of Q3 - Questionnaire to competitors [...]*. Figures based on LCH data.
   231
           LSE, response to question 5 of Q3 – Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
EN                                                         72                                                  EN

         Figure 6: Yearly average trade size for fixed income derivatives executed on Eurex
         and ICAP
        Source: ICAP's observations on the SO, paragraph 6.17.
   (324) These statistics are in line with the purpose for which OTC derivatives are used by market
         participants. According to ICAP, "OTC swaps are used to hedge large amount of IR
         exposure linked to real economy events such as the underwriting of a corporate
         bond".232
   (325) In terms of market participants, while the number of active participants on exchanges
         varies from 20 000 to 150 000, the number of OTC participants is between 200 and 500.233
         Indeed, as illustrated in the picture below in Figure 7, the dynamic between the number
         of participants and the number of traded products is precisely the opposite as far as
         ETDs and OTC derivatives are concerned: ETDs serve a very broad range and
         potentially unlimited number of participants willing to trade a small subset of fully
         standardised derivatives contracts whilst in the OTC environment, a small subset of
         players trades a potentially unlimited number of different products allowing for
         unlimited customisation.
   232
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with ICAP of 18 August 2011, paragraph 2 [...]*.
   233
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.15 referring to
           ISDA data [...]*.
EN                                                          73                                                    EN

         Figure 7: Number of participants and number of traded products
        Source: TABB Group Study, The Global Risk Transfer market: Developments in OTC and Exchange-Traded
        Derivatives, November 2010, slide 22.
   (326) ETDs and OTC derivatives are also subject to different rules. While ETDs are governed
         by the trading rules of the venue that designed the contract, OTC derivatives are subject
         to bilateral contracts negotiated between the parties to the trade, which may use a
         standardised format such as ISDA templates.
   (327) The market investigation indicated that customers generally tend to value different
         characteristics of ETDs and OTCs and arbitrate between them depending on their needs at
         the time of trade. Indeed, customers generally consider objective characteristics of ETDs,
         such as transparency in the price discovery mechanism, the lack of counterparty risk and
         the ability to get out of a position quickly as advantages of on-exchange trading. These, in
         their view, are generally the opposite of the advantages of OTC trading which relate to
         flexibility, lack of transparency and the possibility to execute big trades without market
         impact.234 Indeed, in terms of pricing and transparency, the dynamics prevailing on
         exchange and in the OTC space are fundamentally different: "ETDs involve short terms by
         their nature, provide greater certainty through their constant pricing and due to their
         higher and more diverse participation have what might be called "self sustaining
         liquidity". In OTC inter-dealer markets, the banks make prices to each other, and actively
         "take" offers or bids form the exchange central order book to temporarily hedge OTC
         positions. Although an ETD position is imperfect and only suitable risk mitigation for a
         short duration, its immediacy due to high liquidity, allows it to be used this way very
   234
           See replies to question 14 of Q2 – Questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries and to
           question 19 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers.
EN                                                     74                                                        EN

         efficiently."235 It follows that the use and the appeal of OTC trading is different from
         trading ETDs and cater for different trading strategies.
   (328) ETDs and OTC derivatives are also generally not suitable for the same type of trading
         strategy. While ETDs are suitable for short-term holding of positions, OTC markets, in
         contrast, better cater for longer term strategies. This is because ETDs, due to their high
         liquidity, generally trade at narrow bid-ask spreads in a fully straight-through
         processing236 electronic manner with fast electronic matching for price discovery, whilst
         OTC markets have generally wider bid-ask spreads and still involve voice broking for
         price discovery, at least for highly customised contracts. As a result, it is generally more
         difficult to get out of a position in the OTC market as compared to the highly liquid on-
         exchange environment.237
   (329) The difference between OTC derivatives and ETDs was also recognised by Liffe's Hugh
         Freedberg in his open letter to the Financial Times at the time of DB's bid for Euronext
         in 2006 (at the time, Mr. Freedberg was Liffe's Chief Executive and he is currently
         Liffe's Chairman). In this letter, he stated: "we do not agree with Deutsche Boerse's
         statement that "competition in derivatives trading is between exchanges and the over
         the counter (OTC) markets." On the contrary, we consider there is a clear difference
         between the customised contracts traded OTC and standardised contracts traded on
         exchange."238 This statement also holds true today: such a difference between the
         exchange and the OTC markets is reflected in some recent NYX internal documents
         where Liffe's future contracts are referred to as being "transparent", "centrally
         cleared", able to "trade into a net position", having "short maturities", "wider risk
         distribution than OTC", "lower financial and technical barriers to entry than OTC",
         having "self sustaining liquidity" and for which liquidity is "more reliable in times of
         crisis". This is in contrast to OTC derivatives which are considered to be "opaque,
         bilateral, non-netting, long maturities (and hence risk exposure), high financial and
         technical hurdles to trade, unreliable in times of crisis, and a concentration of risk
         (engendering the "too big too fail" institutions)".239
   (330) Throughout the proceedings, the Notifying Parties have consistently claimed that ETDs
         and OTC derivatives are substitutable as they serve exactly same purpose. In this
         respect, the TABB Study on derivatives usefully explains that while “they both
         compete to serve wholesale risk transfer needs", OTC derivatives and ETDs "represent
         significant differences in the needs that they serve.”240 Indeed, at a very general level,
         the Commission does not dispute that all derivatives, be they traded on exchange or
         OTC, ultimately serve to transfer risk from one economic agent to another. However,
         despite this general function, OTC derivatives and ETDs are different instruments used
   235
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.22 [...]*.
   236
           Straight-through processing refers to the ability to conduct a trade fully electronically without any need
           for manual intervention.
   237
           LSE, response to question 5 of Q3 – Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   238
           See FT Europe's two big derivatives exchanges compete head-on, 9 November 2006, available at:
           http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/59bd1750-6f99-11db-ab7b-0000779e2340.html#axzz1TJtvdq00
           (November 2011)
   239
           See NYX's internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Process
           and Operational Innovation (POI), November 2010, p.69.
   240
           TABB Report, slide 11.
EN                                                         75                                                         EN

         in different circumstances (albeit in most cases by the same customers). Indeed, there is
         overwhelming evidence in the file indicating that traders that use both ETDs and OTC
         derivatives use them for different purposes. In this respect, AFME,241 the major
         association of exchange customers, stated at the Oral Hearing that there is “an obvious
         and widely recognized difference between ETDs and OTC derivatives for everyone
         operating in the derivatives sphere as they clearly serve different purposes.”242
   (331) Similarly, ICAP in its capacity as interested third party admitted to the proceedings noted
         in its reaction to the SO that “OTC and ETD instruments have a completely different
         purpose as financial instruments and this is evidenced by the differences in their
         characteristics. These differences in turn prevent any competitive interaction between the
         two categories of products. [...] While there are complementarities between ETDs and
         OTC derivatives the distinctions between the two are so fundamental that even at the
         margins there is no scope for identifying any competitive constraint exercised by OTC on
         ETD products.”243
   (332) The market investigation showed that in most cases, ETDs cannot be substituted by OTC
         contracts.244 This is because the majority of OTC contracts, be they flex contracts, block
         contracts or pure OTC contracts, are contracts offering customised solutions.245 Indeed,
         the very raison d'être of OTC contracts, which is to allow a perfect hedge for any type of
         risk, is incompatible with the main characteristics of ETD contracts which derive from the
         full standardisation of all contract parameters. By their very nature, ETD contracts cannot
         be customised to cater for traders' hedging needs and are used on a "take it or leave it"
         basis. Even the most standardised OTC contracts, such as vanilla246 interest rate swaps,
         allow for a degree of customisation.247
   (333) In addition, ETDs have a fixed start and end as a result of which each ETD is
         identifiably the same contract as a similar contract held by other parties. OTC
         derivatives, on the other hand, start at the trade date (or another specified date) and last
         for the duration of the contract spanning anywhere from 2 years up to 30 years. As a
         result, each "OTC derivative stands alone as an inherently unique transaction so that
         any new trade is clearly different transaction to that held by any other party (this is not
         altered by clearing, as the start and end dates will still differ)".248 Also, ETDs are
         "almost universally short maturity contracts by design – their characteristic high liquidity
   241
           Association of Financial Markets in Europe includes all major pan- European and global banks, as well
           as other financial market participants.
   242
           AFME’s presentation at the Oral Hearing, 28 October 2011 [...]*.
   243
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, page 3 [...]*.
   244
           See, in particular, from the customers' perspective, replies to question 13 of Q1 – questionnaire to
           customers – Phase I; question 12 of Q2 – questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries –
           Phase I; question 11 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers – derivatives – Phase II; from the competitors'
           standpoint, see in particular replies to question 8 of Q3 – questionnaire to competitors – Phase I; and
           question 5 of Q10 – questionnaire to competitors on derivatives.
   245
           Agreed minutes of a meeting with AFME of 24 August 2011, [...]*.
   246
           The term vanilla refers to simple and relatively standardised products.
   247
           For instance, the intervals for the interest rate payments are subject to the agreement of the parties to a
           contract.
   248
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.4, [...]*.
EN                                                          76                                                         EN

         is a by-product of having a short horizon to maturity."249 The typical exposure offered by
         ETDs is three months and in order to extend that exposure, ETDs must be replaced by a
         new three month ETD contract; this is also true for transactions that refer to a longer-term
         risk, such as long-term interest rate derivatives.
   (334) The market investigation generally indicated that customers use OTC derivatives as a
         default choice (and not as an equal substitute) in situations when a listed contract cannot
         provide the client with the correct risk profile.250 In this respect, one respondent noted
         that the "Decision between ETD and OTC depends on how effectively a position can be
         hedged with a standardised ETD compared to a tailor-made OTC derivative. If ETD is
         applicable, ETD is preferred to OTC."251 Indeed, the liquidity in contracts offering
         identical exposure to ETDs is generally concentrated in the ETD itself on exchange,
         and therefore, there is in principle no reason to trade OTC.252 As a result, customers
         constantly facing the trade-off between liquidity in ETDs and OTC flexibility allowing
         for a perfect hedge, prefer to go to OTC if they need to flex certain parameters of a
         contract which could not be done on order book253. One market participant stated that
         "The OTCs give us more flexibility (dates and amounts) while the ETDs give us more
         liquidity."254 Similarly, it was noted that the "Primary factor for product type (i.e. listed
         vs. OTC) is where product liquidity is - for Rates, Credit & FX majority of liquidity is
         OTC, for Equity derivs majority is listed,"255 and that "For equity derivatives, the
         decision to trade OTC is driven by availability and liquidity of the exchange traded
         instrument, client requirement for non-standard terms and the preference of the
         client."256 The same customer indicated that OTC is preferred when customers need a
         tailor-made solution: "The main motivation for trading OTC is the bespoke nature of
         the contract, with exchanges fees also being a motivation for some clients…for interest
         rate derivatives – clients often requiring customization."257
   (335) Similarly, ICAP explained that "where it is possible for customers to trade on exchange
         (i.e. should a type of contract be available both OTC and on exchange), users would
         prefer to do so (given the significantly reduced risk in trading on exchange given that
   249
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.4, [...]*.
   250
           Replies to question 3 of Questionnaire Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II. [...]*.
   251
           DZ Bank AG, response to question 3 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II,
           [...]*, See also reply to the same question by the Warsaw Stock Exchange, [...]*, according to which
           "Market players like banks and asset management hedge or trade on interest rate derivatives mainly
           OTC, where they can enter into “tailor made” contracts aligned to the cash flows, trade volume and
           dates they need. The “tailor made” products are OTC domain".
   252
           See section 11.1.1.2.2.1.511.1.1.2.2.1.5 b of this Decision for discussion on ETD lookalikes.
   253
           Some replies to question 3 of Questionnaire Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II,
           point also at the opposite situation which can occur when liquidity is concentrated in the OTC products;
           for example, see the following: "Foreign Exchange, because OTC is the only liquid market (according
           to B. Metzler seel. Sohn & Co KGaA, [...]*)", "The non liquid ones are the normal for OTC" ([...]*), "In
           principle, depending on the liquidity of the contract. If listed markets are illiquid, there is preference for
           OTC" (ING Bank Group, [...]*), "Currency options. Liquidity on exchange too small. In general we
           prefer exchange traded products" (UniCredit Bank AG, [...]*).
   254
           Caixa d'Estalvis i Pensions de Barcelona, response to question 3 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on
           derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
   255
           [...]*, , response to question 3 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
   256
           [...]*,, response to question 3 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
   257
           [...]*, response to question 5 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
EN                                                         77                                                             EN

         clearing is through a central counterparty); and secondly, trading OTC is much less
         efficient, given the liquidity of ETDs and the simpler operational process and lower
         costs of trading on exchange."258
   (336) The Notifying Parties criticised in their response to the SO that the Commission did not
         analyse switching behaviour of customers that trade both ETDs and OTC derivatives.
         In this respect, the Commission notes that in response to a switching question, out of 29
         customers who trade both ETDs and OTC derivatives and that replied to the relevant
         question, only 8 customers indicated that they would switch to OTC. 14 customers
         unequivocally indicated that they would continue to trade on exchange (possibly switch
         to another exchange if available) and 7 stated that their choice would potentially be
         influenced by other factors such as the liquidity or choice of their own clients.259 It
         follows that even customers that have mandates to trade OTC would be reluctant to
         switch to OTC for contracts that they currently trade on exchange.
   (337) As concerns the cost of trading on exchange and in the OTC environment, the
         Commission's market investigation did not provide a conclusive picture as to the
         general cost levels of ETDs compared to OTC derivatives.260 However, as concerns the
         comparison between ETDs and OTC contracts which provide the same economic
         exposure, the market investigation clearly indicated that trading of highly liquid ETDs
         is significantly cheaper on-exchange than trading of contracts offering similar economic
         exposure OTC.261 This is principally due to the high automation of the process without
         any human intervention and, in particular, because liquidity in these contracts is
         concentrated on-exchange, resulting in smaller bid-ask spreads offsetting explicit
         trading and clearing fees charged by exchanges as compared to OTC. This also seems
         to be in line with the analysis outlined in DB's White Paper on derivatives, which states
         that "from customers' point of view trading on exchange is approximately 8 times less
         expensive than trading OTC"262 and that "transaction costs for exchange-traded
         derivatives are particularly low."263
   258
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.19 [...]*.
   259
           See responses to question 11 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II.
   260
           See replies to questions 8, 9 and 10 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II;
           questions 8, 9 and 10 of Q9 - Questionnaire to OTC trading platforms- Phase 2; questions 2, 3 and 4 of
           Q10 – questionnaire to competitors on derivatives – Phase II; and questions 2, 3 and 4 of Q14 -
           Questionnaire on derivatives (OTC platforms, short version) - Phase 2. See also BNP Paribas, response
           to question 17 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*, which, as
           acknowledged by the Notifying Parties (response to the SO of 5 October 2011, footnote 106), indicated
           that for ETD look-alikes, the cost of trading is cheaper.
   261
           See replies to question 15 of Q2- Questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries. See also
           for instance [...]*; BNPP, response to question 14 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*.
   262
           See Deutsche Boerse Group, White Paper, The Global derivatives Market – An Introduction, April
           2008, p.30, available at: http://www.scribd.com/doc/61304935/Global-Derivatives-Market (September
           2011). The methodology used divides the revenues of exchanges and broker dealers by the notional
           amount traded on-exchange and OTC, respectively based on BIS statistics.
   263
           See Deutsche Boerse Group, White Paper, The Global derivatives Market – An Introduction, April
           2008, p.32, available at : http://www.scribd.com/doc/61304935/Global-Derivatives-Market (September
           2011).
EN                                                         78                                                       EN

   (338) In this respect, the TABB Study, comparing transaction fees264 on exchange and OTC also
         explains that "transaction fees vary widely from ETDs to OTCDs and, on a nominal basis,
         OTCD clearing fees are 88% to 3700% greater than the highest transaction fees in
         ETDs."265 TABB adds that "although these examples are not necessarily apples to apples
         comparisons – since OTCD fees are clearing-only and the ETD examples include both
         clearing and exchange fees – they do illustrate the nominal divergence between OTCDs
         and ETDs."266Indeed, and as also pointed out by TABB, should trading fees be added to
         the OTC segment, this would only exacerbate this divergence.
   (339) The Notifying Parties contested at the Oral Hearing the relevance of the price comparison
         between ETDs and OTC derivatives, but conceded that "even though OTC may be more
         expensive, 90% of trade is still done anyway OTC. They argued that there are many
         reasons for using OTC, such as to hedge any risk and to avoid posting margin, at least in
         the past, and that this explained the reasons for the success of OTC."267
   (340) The market investigation also provided indications that some of the most liquid exchange-
         traded contracts, in particular futures, could hardly find a substitute in an OTC contract.
         This is due to the very nature of exchange-traded futures which are used by large
         investment banks for hedging of delta positions they have in the OTC market.268 Such
         hedging activity implies frequent trades to adjust to constantly changing risk exposure. 269
         Given that it is by definition more difficult to find a counterparty in the OTC market, as
         the OTC market is by definition not very liquid as concerns these products, such activity
         could simply not be replicated in the OTC market.
   (341) In contrast with the Notifying Parties' arguments and with all the remaining claims they
         made in these proceedings, NYSE's public response to the recent Commission
         Communication on a Roadmap for ensuring efficient, safe and sound derivative
         markets270 accurately summarises the main reasons why some customers have chosen to
         transact business OTC which may include: "(i) A desire to use the economic profile of
         bespoke or non-standardised contracts. (ii) A desire to avoid exchange and clearing
         fees (note that considerable evidence exists that the increased operational cost of OTC
         derivatives often makes them more expensive than exchange trading or central
         clearing). (iii) A desire to negotiate, package and trade large deals without changing
         the prevailing market price. (iv) A desire to maintain market opacity and wider, more
         profitable spreads. Recognising the legitimate nature of the first three of these
         motivations, at least in some circumstances, NYSE Liffe has pioneered the clearing of
         OTC derivatives to complement its exchange traded business".271
   264
           The compared transaction fees for ETDs include both trading and clearing fees while for OTC trades the
           compared fees are only clearing fees as there is no trading fees.
   265
           TABB Report, slide 35.
   266
           TABB Report, slide 35.
   267
           See recording of Oral Hearing, 27 October 2011, ,[…]*, morning session, 03:30:50.
   268
           Delta is the ratio comparing the change in the price of the underlying asset and of the derivative
           contract.
   269
           See agreed minutes of a teleconference call with BNPP of 16 September 2011, [...]*; and agreed
           minutes of a teleconference call with LSE of 21 September 2011, [...]*.
   270
           COM(2009) 332 final.
   271
           Response to the European Commission Communication on a Roadmap for ensuring efficient, safe and
           sound          derivative         markets,            September       2009,        available        at
EN                                                          79                                                    EN

   (342) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that ETDs and OTC contracts have
         different and autonomous rationales for their existence aiming at addressing different
         customer needs. As a result, customers would not readily switch from ETDs to OTC
         derivatives should the merged entity attempt to exercise market power.
                d. Critical loss analysis performed by the Notifying Parties does not evidence
                     substitutability between ETDs and OTC derivatives
   (343) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties argue that the Commission’s market
         investigation results are equally consistent with a wider market definition than that of
         trading of ETDs272. The Notifying Parties reached this conclusion based on critical loss
         analysis using the market investigation responses273. The Notifying Parties argue that it
         is possible to show that the merged entity would not be able to profitably raise the price
         of trading ETDs by 5-10% – that is to say, other competitive constraints, such as OTC
         trading, would defeat any price increase.
   (344) Critical loss analysis may be a simple and appealing methodology to assess the SSNIP
         question. However, because of its simplicity, critical loss analysis relies on numerous
         assumptions and its use has been subject to significant debate, in particular for industries
         where fixed costs are the main source of costs.
   (345) Typically, where gross margins are high, critical loss analysis tends to define markets as
         wide because a price increase would be unprofitable with a few lost sales. However, high
         margins also tend to indicate that firms have a certain degree of market power and that, in
         fact, price elasticity may be rather low274. This would not only suggest that actual loss
         would in fact be low, but it would also suggest that markets may possibly be narrow.
         Indeed, firms are expected to set prices that maximise profits and price is inversely related
         with the demand elasticity faced by the firm. Hence, low price elasticity tends to lead to
         high prices (and high margins).
   (346) The Notifying Parties' critical loss analysis is not informative for the purposes of casting
         doubts on the Commission's product market definition where ETD and OTC are separate
         markets. The Notifying Parties submit a very simplistic analysis which assumes that
         products are homogeneous, that there is no price discrimination and disregarding the fact
         that in this industry costs are mostly fixed.
   (347) Indeed, the Commission notes that the critical loss analysis is of little use in differentiated
         products such as those at hand. It is clear that ETD contract characteristics vary
         substantially (for instance maturity, underlying, strike level) and that there can be
         considerable variability in the margins earned on different ETD contracts. Furthermore,
           https://circabc.europa.eu/d/d/workspace/SpacesStore/52cf8134-69f5-4a9c-9050-
           0f87e91e8ca0/nyse_euronext_en.pdf.
   272
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraph 84.
   273
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Annex I.3: Compass Lexecon Statistical Assessment of Market
           investigation Questions.
   274
           The Commission notes that this has also been pointed out by another jurisdiction: "if a firm sets price
           well above incremental cost, that normally indicates either that the firm believes its customers are not
           highly sensitive to price (not in itself of antitrust concern, [...]*) or that the firm and its rivals are
           engaged in coordinated interaction", United States Department of Justice and the Federal Trade
           Commission Horizontal Merger Guidelines, 19 August 2010, paragraph 2.1.1.
EN                                                       80                                                           EN

         the Commission has shown that the Notifying Parties discriminate among different
         categories of customers275. Instead, the Notifying Parties' analysis assumes a constant
         margin earned for all ETD products. The use of an average price and a single price
         increase across the board to calculate the critical loss is not consistent with the way in
         which a hypothetical monopolist would price in this industry. It is possible that a 5-10 %
         average price increase could profitably be achieved by increasing prices to certain
         customers and for some particular ETD contracts.
   (348) Finally, the Notifying Parties disregard the fact that fixed costs are the main source of costs
         in this industry. In such types of industries, gross margins are high and therefore both the
         critical loss and the actual loss are likely to be low. Moreover, the Commission cannot rely
         on the input data employed by the Notifying Parties in the analysis. The Notifying Parties
         assume a certain level of gross margins rather than using their actual margins figures.
         Furthermore, the actual loss figures are not estimated but are derived from the Notifying
         Parties' analysis of the replies to the Commission's market investigation. The outcome of
         the Notifying Parties' analysis is therefore questionable.
   (349) Finally, a critical loss analysis assumes a very short run perspective. A hypothetical
         monopolist could find it profitable to increase prices on a permanent basis by modifying
         its current product offer, for instance, by modifying contract maturities or the portfolio of
         products offered. Hence, this would lead to gross margins (based on avoidable costs) to be
         lower than those based on short run variable costs. However, the Commission cannot
         judge the actual gross margin figures employed by the Notifying Parties as they do not
         constitute actual gross margin data
   (350) Therefore, the Commission considers that the Notifying Parties' critical loss analysis
         does not evidence a single product market definition encompassing ETD and OTC
         markets.
                e. ETDs and OTC respond to complementary trading strategies
   (351) In their reply to the decision opening the proceedings, the Notifying Parties indicated that
         "traders are increasingly actively choosing between OTC trading and exchange-trading,
         often on a trade-by-trade-basis."276 To support their claim, the Notifying Parties refer to
         NYSE's price discovery platform, Cscreen, which allows the quoting of prices of block
         size trades in ETDs and OTC derivatives side-by-side.277
   (352) As already explained above, as concerns ETD contracts traded on the Notifying Parties'
         platforms, customers have a choice between exchange-trading and OTC trading on a
         trade-by-trade basis only to the extent that there is a lookalike of an ETD contract
         available in the OTC environment. As concerns other OTC contracts that do not fall in the
         category of ETD lookalikes, they fulfil different needs that cannot be satisfied through an
         exchange contract. For instance, as concerns the use of an interest rate swap as compared
         to an exchange traded interest rate future, the market investigation indicated that they are
         used for very different purposes. In this respect, ICAP noted that "Many wholesale users
   275
           See Recital (299) of this Decision.
   276
           Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, Derivatives market
           definition, paragraph 20.
   277
           See discussion on Cscreen in section 11.1.1.2.2.1.6 c of this Decision.
EN                                                       81                                               EN

         use both ETDs and OTC derivatives. However, the purpose and the circumstances in
         which ETDs and OTC derivatives are used, from ICAP’s perspective as a broker,
         appear to be substantially different. While IR futures on exchange are highly
         standardised, liquid products traded in an average size of about € 3m or less, with a
         minimum trade size of € 100k, OTC swaps are used to hedge large amount of IR
         exposure linked to real economy events such as the underwriting of a corporate bond,
         and have an average transaction size is (sic) in the order of €100 m, and a practical
         minimum transaction size of €10m (5 year swap)."278 This would indicate that ETDs
         and OTC are complementary rather than substitutable.
   (353) Similarly, to underline the inherent complementarity between ETDs and OTC derivatives,
         one respondent in its response to questions enquiring about the nature and characteristics
         of ETDs and OTC derivatives stated that: "The Commission's question neglects the point
         in seeking to identify how the OTC and Listed environments may be comparable rather
         than acknowledging the fundamental, historical and practical reasons why the two
         markets serve different purposes, are symbiotic, and can continue to co-exist in the future
         to serve users in a complementary and effective manner."279
   (354) The coexistence between ETDs and OTC derivatives was also recognised by DB in its
         White Paper where DB explains the evolution of a derivative contract. "Most derivatives
         products are initially developed as OTC derivatives. Once a product matures, exchanges
         "industrialize" it, creating a liquid market for a standardized and refined form of the new
         derivatives product. The OTC and exchange-traded derivatives then coexist side-by-
         side."280 Indeed, the OTC market is generally viewed as an incubator for exchange
         products.281 The life cycle of a derivatives contract starts at its birth in the OTC
         environment and develops over time to reach the maturity when it can become traded on
         exchange. While it is true that most derivatives contracts do not reach this point, OTC
         contracts generally complement rather than substitute exchange contracts. This is also
         supported by NYSE which, in replying to a CESR Consultation, stated that "NYSE
         Euronext considers that it is appropriate that non-standardised contracts should continue
         to exist in order to provide bespoke risk management tools to customers. Each derivatives
         market is different and should therefore be considered separately in this respect, e.g. fixed
         income, equities, soft commodities, energy and metals".282
   (355) ETDs and OTC derivatives within the same asset class are generally not used for the same
         purpose by their users. Indeed, according to the TABB report, OTC derivatives are used in
         specific circumstances where ETDs cannot achieve the same goal: "Banks, financial firms
   278
          Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with ICAP of 18 August 2011, [...]*.
   279
          BCG Brokers LP, response to question 10 of Q9 – Questionnaire to OTC trading platforms.
   280
          See Deutsche Boerse Group, White Paper, The Global derivatives Market – An Introduction, April
          2008, p.10, available at : http://www.scribd.com/doc/61304935/Global-Derivatives-Market (September
          2011).
   281
          See agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Goldman Sachs of 19 September 2011, [...]*; FOA,
          response to question 14 of Q8 - – Questionnaire to customers – derivatives – Phase II, [...]*: "It should
          also be noted that OTC markets are the "birthpool" for the emergence of standardised OTC contracts in
          new markets which, once they have reached a certain volume, only then become eligible for multilateral
          execution on a central marketplace."
   282
          Point 2.9 of Comments by NYSE Euronext on CESR’s Consultation on Standardisation and
          Exchange        Trading         of     OTC       Derivatives,      30/08/2010,       available         at
          http://www.esma.europa.eu/index.php?page=responses&id=169 (October 2011).
EN                                                      82                                                          EN

         and large corporations use OTCDs to manage interest rate and currency risks that are too
         large or complex to manage using ETDs. Firms in the food, energy and manufacturing
         industries use OTCDs to manage physical commodity risks for precision that cannot be
         achieved in ETDs."283
   (356) The fact that ETD derivatives and OTC derivatives within the same asset class do not
         compete directly but are rather complementary products addressing different customer
         needs is also evidenced by the different licensing policy licence-holders of equity
         indices apply to ETDs and OTC derivative products. It is telling that STOXX, the
         biggest European index [discussion of STOXX licensing practice]* 284[…]*285 […]*.286
         If it were the case, as the Notifying Parties claim, that OTC products were directly
         competing with listed products, exchanges would have no incentive to grant such
         licences. When questioned about these incentives at the Oral Hearing, Deutsche Börse
         was not able to explain how the fact that STOXX was willing to license a range of OTC
         dealers but not rival derivatives exchanges which had requested such a licence (such as
         Turquoise) was consistent with the claim that OTC derivatives and ETDs were in the
         same market. It limited itself to stating that this was a commercial choice underlined by
         the desire to avoid fragmentation of liquidity.287 Indeed, this implies that OTC licenses
         do not have an impact on fragmentation of liquidity as OTC contracts are used in
         parallel to ETDs and no major substitution is likely to occur between the two. More
         generally, this implies that licence providers do not see an economically unfavourable
         outcome to licensing to the OTC world as this would not erode their ETD franchise,
         whereas licensing to a direct exchange competitor would result in a commercially
         unfavourable outcome. In this general context, one of the OTC licence-holders also
         explained that while these OTC contracts are offered on the same underlyings, they do not
         directly compete with listed products as they are customised and typically of large size.288
   (357) The results of the market investigation also confirm that customers generally consider the
         two segments as complementary. In this regard, one market participant stated that "The
         OTC and Exchange Traded markets should to co-exist and complement each other as has
         been done for two generations"289 and explained that "It may be a misnomer to speak of
         standardized OTC contracts. There are daily benchmarks which attract a higher
         percentage of the overall volume but the bespoke nature of risk mitigation at the heart of
         OTC trading ensures that Exchange Traded listed products do not approximate the
         purpose of OTC products. This is why Exchange Traded and OTC markets have always
         been complementary with each other. The purpose of each market is distinctly different
         and in combination serve the needs of market participants and end users. Therefore,
         exchange 'lookalike' products have historically not been successful as the listed,
   283
           TABB Report, slide 14.
   284
           See footnote 77 of this Decision.
   285
           See LSE, reply to question 14 of Q3 – questionnaire to competitors – Phase I, [...]*, See agreed minutes
           of a meeting with AFME of 24 August 2011, [...]*, para. 11. See internal doc "Memo on FTSE 100
           index futures - Turquoise Response", April 2011, ENX-00262- Email from […]* subject: Bullet points
           for EDX exchange leaders dinner introduction, 4/06/2010, ENX-00888 -00002.
   286
           See response to the Commission's Second RFI of 13 September 2011 and agreed minutes of
           teleconference call with BNPP of 16 September 2011, [...]*.
   287
           See recording of the Oral Hearing, 27 October 2011, morning session, at 3:49:00.
   288
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with BNPP of 16 September 2011, [...]*.
   289
           BGC (Cantor Fitzgerald Group), response to question 16 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers –
           derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
EN                                                      83                                                          EN

         completely standardised characteristics do not suit the flexibility requirements and risk
         matching needs of end users".290
   (358) Moreover, ETD and OTC markets are organised very differently which evidences different
         dynamics prevailing in the two environments. For instance, while exchanges
         predominantly operate a closed vertical silo model where customers have no choice of
         clearing-house, OTC markets are, where relevant, generally characterised by an open
         clearing model where customers indicate how and where they want their contracts cleared
         irrespective of whether a contract is traded bilaterally or on a multilateral trading
         platform.291
   (359) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that ETDs and OTC derivatives are
         not used by their users as substitutes since they correspond to different and complementary
         trading strategies.
                 f. The Notifying Parties' internal documents do not sustain the claim that
                    substitution between ETDs and OTC derivatives occurs regularly
   (360) In their response to the decision opening the proceedings, the Notifying Parties refer to
         a number of their internal documents which they argue evidence the substitutability
         between ETDs and OTC derivatives.292 The same documents were referred to by the
         Notifying Parties in their response to the SO.
   (361) However, a close analysis of these documents rather points to the existence of two
         phenomena that are not disputed by the Commission. First, these internal documents
         show the co-existence of two parallel ETDs and OTC derivatives environments where
         any substitution occurs at the margin and only for ETD lookalikes; and second, that
         exchanges continuously try to capture volumes from the OTC market and bring more
         standardised contracts on exchange. In this context, many internal documents rather
         point towards a potential one way competitive constraint exercised by ETDs on OTC
         derivatives while no internal document directly points towards substitution between
         ETDs and OTC in response to a price increase.
   290
           BGC (Cantor Fitzgerald Group), response to question 14 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers –
           derivatives – Phase II, [...]*. See also, more specifically with reference to hedging, BNPP, agreed
           minutes of conference call of 16 September 2011, [...]*: "As concerns BNPP's hedging needs, listed
           products are indispensable and could not be replaced by any OTC contract. This is because trading
           OTC needs to be complemented by listed products which are used to hedge the delta position". See
           agreed minutes of conference call with Goldman Sachs of 16 September 2011, [...]* and agreed minutes
           of conference call with ICAP of 18 August 2011 [...]*, according to which "many wholesale users use
           both ETDs and OTC derivatives. However, the purpose and the circumstances in which ETDs and OTC
           derivatives are used, from ICAP’s perspective as a broker, appear to be substantially different. While
           IR futures on exchange are highly standardised, liquid products traded in an average size of about € 3m
           or less, with a minimum trade size of € 100k, OTC swaps are used to hedge large amount of IR
           exposure linked to real economy events such as the underwriting of a corporate bond, and have an
           average transaction size is in the order of €100 m, and a practical minimum transaction size of €10m (5
           year swap)". See agreed minutes of a teleconference call with ICE of 14 September 2011, paragraph 13,
           [...]*.
   291
           Indeed, all swaps can be cleared at Swapclear irrespective of the execution venue.
   292
           See Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, Derivatives
           market definition, section D, paragraph 44.
EN                                                        84                                                       EN

   (362) For instance, in support of their argument that there is fee competition between ETDs
         and OTC derivatives, the Notifying Parties quote a DB internal document which refers
         to a situation where Eurex tried to introduce a new options contract based on a contract
         with an established liquidity OTC - […]*.[…]*.293 It is in this context that Eurex states
         that the […]*294 Therefore, the Commission considers that this statement has been
         taken out of context by the Notifying Parties. The document refers to a situation where
         Eurex attacks the OTC established contract and tries to attract the open interest on
         exchange (for which it is well placed as it controls the open interest of exchange traded
         contracts based on the IP protected STOXX index underlyings). It is logical that in this
         context, Eurex has to have competitive pricing if it wants to shift the open interest.
         However, this document does not evidence the competitive constraint from OTC
         products on exchanges.
   (363) While the OTC market is significantly bigger in terms of notional amount of traded
         derivatives, there is a trend whereby the exchange segment is growing at the expense of
         OTC products. This is due to two main phenomena: the increasing standardisation of
         OTC contracts and the ongoing regulatory efforts to bring more trades into the
         regulated exchange environment.295 This is also recognised by DB's White Paper on
         derivatives where it is stated that "recently, however, the exchange segment has grown
         faster than OTC segment. This is widely perceived to be a result of the increasing
         standardization of derivatives contracts which facilitates exchange trading. Other
         contributing factors are a number of advantages of on-exchange trading: price
         transparency, risk mitigation and transaction costs are among the most important."296
   (364) The documents referred to by the Notifying Parties show that exchanges constantly fight
         between themselves to win new business by capturing contracts that are currently in the
         OTC environment. However, evidence of such unidirectional movement of OTC
         contracts towards the exchange environment does not prove substitution between ETDs
         and OTC derivatives. Instead, such evidence rather points towards natural one-way
         development whereby OTC contracts, as they become sufficiently standardised, tend to
         move to regulated exchanges where the liquidity in these contracts ultimately develops.
         As a result, such documents do not provide, as suggested by the Notifying Parties,
         evidence of the existence of a competitive constraint exercised by OTC derivatives on
         listed products or of a competitive constraint exercised by OTC trading platforms on
         exchanges. The Notifying Parties therefore incorrectly interpret these documents as
         showing threats to their business from the OTC market.
   (365) Moreover, the fact that a switching from ETDs to OTC derivatives is not an observable
         phenomenon (except for marginal switching to ETD lookalikes when it comes to a
         certain customers) is also consistent with the fact that listed derivatives, in particular
   293
           DB internal documents, Introduction of Options on ,[…]*.
   294
           DB internal documents, Introduction of Options on ,[…]*.
   295
           At the European level, the European Commission is currently working on a legislative project
           addressing these issues: the review of the MiFID (the "MiFID II") which seeks inter alia to move
           standardised OTC derivatives contracts to exchanges or electronic trading platforms.
   296
           See Deutsche Boerse Group, White Paper, The Global derivatives Market – An Introduction, April
           2008,             p.12,             available             at              :          http://deutsche-
           boerse.com/mr/binary/0A4A6E3F8ED836BDC1257457002D5669/$File/2008-
           04%20DB_WP%20GlobalDerivativesMarket_e.pdf?OpenElement (viewed on 26 January 2012).
EN                                                      85                                                       EN

         those traded on exchanges' order books, are not generally suitable to be traded away
         from the exchange environment. In this context, LSE noted during the second phase
         market investigation that "Order book business is not suitable for trading away from an
         order book due to its small size and the way in which customers trade, requiring
         immediate execution on a multilateral basis."297
   (366) It follows from the above that the Notifying Parties' claim that "trading customers
         consider these products as ready substitutes and have the means and ability to quickly
         and easily substitute between them"298 cannot be sustained on the basis of the evidence
         contained in their internal documents.
               g. Conclusion
   (367) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that even for customers that trade
         both ETDs and OTC derivatives, the ability to directly substitute between ETDs and
         OTC derivatives would be at best limited to ETD lookalikes. The remaining OTC
         products generally address different customer needs than ETDs, in particular the need
         to achieve a customised perfect hedge which is not possible with an ETD contract. As a
         result, the Commission considers that even these customers do not use ETDs and OTC
         derivatives as substitutes but as complementary tools in their trading strategies.
                                 11.1.1.2.2.1.6.      Existence of OTC trading platforms, broker-
                                     dealers and inter-dealer brokers does not imply a competitive
                                     constraint from OTC derivatives on ETDs
   (368) In their response to the decision opening the proceedings, the Notifying Parties claimed
         that OTC trading platforms such as those provided by Tradeweb, interdealer brokers (or
         IDBs) such as ICAP or GFI, broker-dealers, and price discovery platforms such as
         Cscreen, allow customers to choose between ETDs and OTC derivatives on a trade-to-
         trade basis and hence provide evidence for the competitive constraint OTC contracts
         allegedly exert on ETDs.299 Finally, they argue that IDBs and large broker-dealers also
         play a gatekeeper role and decide where a trade ends, on exchange or OTC.
               a. OTC trading platforms make it possible to find a counterparty in the OTC
                   market
   (369) The market investigation in this Decision indicated that OTC trading platforms do not
         operate exchange-like multilateral and automated trading systems for contracts
         comparable to those of the Notifying Parties. The Notifying Parties suggested in their
         response to the decision opening the proceedings that "the increasing similarities
         between trading venues and the move to electronic trading on all platforms (OTC and
         on-exchange) allows most traders to use any trading venue."300 Whilst these venues
   297
           LSE, response to question 13 of Q10 - Questionnaire to competitors on derivatives – Phase II [...]*.
   298
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, Derivatives
           market definition, paragraph 45.
   299
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, Derivatives
           market definition, paragraph 21-22.
   300
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, Derivatives
           market definition, paragraph 19.
EN                                                      86                                                      EN

         may provide electronic trading similar to that provided by exchanges for some other
         asset classes, and whilst they may be accessible to a number of traders, they do not
         allow order book trading of contracts similar to those of the Notifying Parties, and
         therefore if a user wants to trade a contract offering comparable exposure to one of the
         Notifying Parties' ETDs using a multilateral anonymous order book mechanism and
         with elimination of counterparty risk, OTC trading is not an option. In any event, as
         already explained above, the choice of trading venue depends on liquidity and the
         customer's need for a customised solution. If a contract can be traded on exchange,
         trading an OTC lookalike is rarely a preferred option.301
   (370) The Notifying Parties suggested in their response to the decision opening the
         proceedings that platforms like ICAP or Tradeweb "offer customers the option (but in
         many cases make the decision themselves) to bring their trades on-exchange or to
         execute them OTC."302
   (371) As concerns ICAP, the market investigation showed that ICAP offers two types of
         services, namely (i) an electronic brokerage service for block trades in listed derivatives
         and (ii), more significantly in commercial terms, ICAP acts as a "B to B" (bank to
         bank) broker in pure OTC asset classes, principally swaps.303 ICAP does not list
         derivatives contracts, but rather only provides a platform for establishing bilateral
         contracts between banks, also known as interdealer broker. This is confirmed by one of
         the broker-dealers which uses ICAP as a platform for its OTC trades: "ICAP is an
         interdealer broker active as a 'middleman' in the wholesale market where dealers such
         as GSI [Goldman Sachs] interact. Interdealer brokers like ICAP are part of the OTC
         market infrastructure and do not list products in the same way as exchanges do."304
   (372) Tradeweb is exclusively active in the OTC market and provides an electronic platform
         to facilitate trades in OTC contracts between dealers and liquidity takers. It operates on
         the basis of a request for quote (RFQ) methodology whereby the buy-side requests
         quotes from a circle of dealers with whom it has established a link through the
         Tradeweb platform. There is also a limited portion of contracts that are related to block
         size listed contracts.305 The transactions bilaterally agreed on Tradeweb can then be
         cleared on exchanges via services such as Bclear.306 At the time when a customer wants
         to trade a contract on Tradeweb's platform, the customer has to indicate which type of
         contract it wishes to ask a quote for. This is because the price of that contract depends
         on whether it is a block size listed contract or an OTC contract. As a result, Tradeweb
         does not offer a choice of ETDs and OTC derivatives on its platform; it only allows the
         opportunity to its customers to book their block size trades and then to have them
         cleared via exchange clearing facilities it selects at the time of the RFQ.307
   301
           See section 11.1.1.2.2.1.5 b of this Decision for discussion of ETD lookalikes.
   302
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, Derivatives
           market definition, paragraph 22.
   303
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with ICAP of 14 September 2011, [...]*.
   304
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Goldman Sachs of 19 September 2011, [...]*.
   305
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Tradeweb of 26 September 2011, paragraph 3 [...]*.
   306
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Tradeweb of 19 September 2011, [...]*, paragraph 9.
   307
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Tradeweb of 19 September 2011, [...]*, paragraph 7, and
           agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Tradeweb of 26 September 2011, paragraph 4 [...]*.
EN                                                         87                                                   EN

   (373) It follows that the business model of OTC trading platforms, while allowing for a
         multilateral interaction, focuses on the OTC side of the market. Therefore, these players
         do not concentrate on leading customer choice either towards ETDs or OTC derivatives
         but instead focus on the big size customised deals characteristic of the OTC wholesale
         market, mainly in typically OTC asset classes such as IR swaps.
                b. Broker-dealers and inter-dealer brokers focus on the OTC market and do not
                     play a gatekeeper role
   (374) In their response to the decision opening the proceedings and in their response to the
         SO308, the Notifying Parties claimed that their main customers, namely the largest
         broker-dealers such as […]*,309 and the inter-dealer brokers act as gatekeepers in the
         sense that they control access to the exchanges, acting as agents for their clients who
         are not direct members of the exchanges.310 They further argue that these market
         participants exercise tremendous power over the exchanges, controlling where the
         business ends up, on exchange or OTC311. According to the Notifying Parties, these
         major market players, which are clearing members of all major exchanges, are in a
         unique position to facilitate the shift of significant amounts of liquidity very quickly.
         Large broker-dealers and execution brokers (or IDBs) with access to multiple
         exchanges worldwide account for a significant portion of the Notifying Parties’
         business and would be more than capable of resisting any attempt to exert market
         power by NYX, DB, or the merged entity.
   (375) As regards the claim that those market participants play a gatekeeper role, the market
         investigation has provided ample evidence that the decision of whether or not to trade
         OTC, in those instances where both routes are possible, is rarely left by clients to
         brokers. In this respect virtually all respondents indicated that they specify their choice
         of execution mechanism (on exchange or OTC) when they trade derivatives contracts
         through their brokers312. This was also confirmed by a number of replies from the
   308
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, paragraphs 22, 25
           (section on derivatives trading and clearing - market definition). Notifying Parties' response to the SO,
           Introduction, paragraph 50.
   309
           According to the Notifying Parties, these are the main companies: .[…]*
   310
           In this respect the Notifying Parties argue that IDBs offer to customers the option to bring their trades
           on exchange or to execute them OTC, sometimes offering them on a single screen and side-by-side.
   311
           As to the argument related to the alleged buyer power, see section 11.2.1.8 of this Decision.
   312
           See replies to question 6 of Q 2 - – questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase
           1, reading "When contemplating a transaction in a derivative contract through a broker, do you
           indicate your choice of execution channel between on-exchange execution and OTC? We are able and
           do specify this on a trade-by-trade basis / The choice is made by our sell-side intermediary
           (broker/dealer) on the basis of criteria we have communicated in advance, namely (please specify in a
           box below) / We leave the choice completely free to our sell-side intermediary (broker/dealer)": 18
           respondents said that they specify it on a trade-by-trade basis to the broker and 2 said that they give to
           the broker the criteria to be followed for a set of trades, only 3 respondents said they leave the broker
           free to make the choice. See also response to question 7 of the same questionnaire ("Are you able
           further to choose between individual trading venues on which the intermediary will execute the trade?
           We are able to specify this on a trade-by-trade basis / The choice is made by our sell-side intermediary
           (broker/dealer) on the basis of criteria we have communicated in advance, namely….. (please specify in
           a box below) / The choice is freely made by our sell-side intermediary (broker/dealer)"), to which 16
           replied that they specify their choice on a trade-by-trade basis, 1 said that it gives to the broker the
           criteria to be followed for a set of trades and only 8 customers would leave their broker completely free
           to choose.
EN                                                          88                                                        EN

         broker-dealers to the switching question indicating that their reaction to a price increase
         would depend on their clients' decision.313 In this respect, BNPP is typical in stating
         that: "The choice whether to trade OTC or ETD depends on the clients; if they can
         trade both, they would indicate their preference".314 Similarly, AFME reiterated in its
         presentation at the Oral Hearing that "banks deal in the products that their clients want
         to use – it cannot be any other way; but our clients, in turn, have to operate within the
         constraints of the current market structure, which for many of them means the ETD
         universe. As such AFME rejects the concept of the banks acting as so called
         "gatekeepers""315. This is also described very clearly by Goldman Sachs, which stated
         to have "very sophisticated [clients] that know how to trade and that use all types of
         derivatives. They choose between different derivatives contracts to best manage their
         risk exposure. For instance, if they need a simple hedge and a listed contract can
         provide that, they would go on exchange as that is where this type of transaction in
         highly liquid contracts is cheapest. However, if they need a more complex tailored
         hedge or a large size deal, they would go OTC although it is more expensive. They
         always choose the most optimal solution for their need taking into account factors such
         as whether a product provides an exact hedge, liquidity in the contract, size of the deal
         and its market impact if executed on transparent order book and time to implement the
         transaction"316.
   (376) In addition, the claim that broker-dealers are gatekeepers is also inconsistent with the
         Notifying Parties' claim that these same players are their competitors. Indeed, one
         cannot be a gatekeeper to a market where one competes. This is because there is no
         commercial rationale to channel business to competitors instead of supporting one's
         own business.
   (377) During the Oral Hearing, in response to a question about incentives of large banks (that
         is to say broker-dealers) to direct liquidity on exchanges as opposed to executing the
         trades themselves317 […]* ([…]* of Liffe) stated that: "they decide to put liquidity on
         exchange because it is where the best price and best liquidity is. It's an open and
         transparent market, on a screen, they can see the complete depth of the prices, it's
         where the tight bid-offer spread is. I think we are also alluding to the fact that banks
         are part owners of platforms and exchanges, (note the volume flow to MTF[…]) so that
         they are gatekeepers in the sense that they can either internalize a trade (they can trade
         it on MTF) or on exchange. However there are some rules called best execution rules
   313
           See response to question 11 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customer on derivatives – Phase 2, by BGC
           (Cantor Fitzgerald Group) [...]*, [...]*, Tullett Group [...]*, B. Metzler seel. Sohn & Co KGaA [...]*,
           Citigroup Global Markets Limited [...]*, and Barclay [...]*. See also Erste Group Bank AG, response to
           question 11 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase 1 "Institutional client takes the decision to
           99.9%. In 0.1% of the cases we are executing on the best priced market" [...]*, Credit Suisse, question
           25 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase 1 "As the customer choose the execution venue, it is very
           likely part of the customer's decision making process," [...]*.
   314
           BNPP, agreed minutes of a teleconference call of 16 September 2011, [...]* See also replies to question
           6 of Q2 – questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase I.
   315
           AFME presentation at the Oral Hearing, 28.10.2011 [...]*.
   316
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with GSI of 19 September 2011, [...]*.
   317
           The following question was asked by a member of the case-team to the Notifying Parties' delegation:
           "You argue that the banks perform a gatekeeper role and that they can decide where to direct liquidity
           and that they can keep it on their own books, if I understood your argument correctly. Can you explain
           why exactly do the banks decide to put liquidity on exchanges at all? What's driving that decision?"
EN                                                         89                                                      EN

         where they are supposed to go on the place of the best execution. In the States that's
         actually a law for asset managers. It's not as quite well defined in Europe. But in order
         to answer your question upfront: they go where the best liquidity is".318
   (378) Therefore from Mr. […]* reply, it is apparent that once the liquidity is settled, the
         broker-dealers often have very limited discretion on where to place an order and,
         moreover, pursuant to US law and Article 21 of MiFID,319 they normally have a so
         called "best execution obligation" according to which they have to trade where the best
         liquidity is, which is on exchanges in the case of ETDs. It follows that the gatekeeper
         role of the broker-dealers and IDBs is at best limited.
   (379) This only shows that broker-dealers operate in a different space than exchanges. It is
         only logical that to the extent they could execute a trade themselves, they would have
         no incentive to channel it on exchange.
   (380) As to the IDBs such as ICAP, the market investigation revealed that IDBs themselves
         consider that they address a specific segment in the market offering to their customers
         trades in both standard large size and customised contracts and often with flexible
         funding requirements. Furthermore, the customers of IDBs are generally sophisticated
         investors who know in detail what trading strategy they or their clients wish to adopt320.
         As a result, they typically indicate which product they want to trade and do not leave
         the choice to the IDB321. As a result, IDBs do not control whether to place an order on
         exchange or execute it OTC.
   (381) ICAP, explaining its part of the activity as an interdealer broker reiterated that "ICAP
         does not have any function as a “gate-keeper” on where the business ends up on
         exchanges or OTC platforms. Any such conclusion mischaracterises the inherent role of
         an interdealer broker. ICAP has no direction over the investment decisions on risk
         allocation or the choice between the types of assets. ICAP acts for sophisticated
         customers to facilitate trading between different financial instruments. Simply put, for
         the vast majority of traded instruments, ICAP does not make any decision on behalf of
         its customers and therefore has no influence over whether to place an order on the
         exchange or to execute it OTC."322
   318
           See recording of Oral Hearing, 27 October 2011, afternoon session, at 03:02:20.
   319
           See Article 21 Obligation to execute orders on terms most favourable to the client, MiFID, paragraph 1:
           Member States shall require that investment firms take all reasonable steps to obtain, when executing
           orders, the best possible result for their clients taking into account price, costs, speed, likelihood of
           execution and settlement, size, nature or any other consideration relevant to the execution of the order.
           Nevertheless, whenever there is a specific instruction from the client the investment firm shall execute
           the order following the specific instruction. See also whereas number 33, 41 and 44 of MiFID.
   320
           BNPP, agreed minutes of conference call of 16 September 2011, [...]*: "The choice whether to trade
           OTC or ETD depends on the clients; if they can trade both, they would indicate their preference". See
           also replies to question 6 of Q2 – questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase I.
   321
           See agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Goldman Sachs of 19 September 2011, [...]*. See also
           replies to question 6 of Q2 - – questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase I.
   322
           ICAP, Observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraph 6.28 [...]*, see
           also agreed minutes of a teleconference call with ICAP of 14.9.2011[...]*, paragraphs 5 "When a
           customer comes to ICAP, it already has a certain strategy in mind (either ETD deal or OTC swap, or
           both) and ICAP executes what the client requests. ICAP does not decide or advise customers to route
           the trade either on exchange or OTC".
EN                                                         90                                                        EN

   (382) In the same vein, [one customer]* stated that323: "As an intermediary, [...]* acts under
         instruction from our clients. On the assumption that there is choice of venue available
         for the products being traded, the depth of the liquidity pool will be the primary factor
         in this process. General economics/cost of trading and processing efficiency, although
         very important, we assume to secondary in terms of the method by which our clients
         choose the venue for execution".
   (383) The limited gatekeeper role of IDBs is also acknowledged by broker-dealers, in turn
         customers also of IDBs, stating that "As regards OTC trading platforms such as
         Tradeweb and ICAP, they are interdealer brokers, replacing the order book by
         matching orders of big banks for illiquid products. As concerns liquid ETDs, customers
         go directly to the exchange. Originally, this trading was made by voice brokers, then
         the business has been automated and now it consists of electronic platforms although
         there is still a portion that is fairly manual. They do not disseminate information on
         trades so as to avoid effects on price. This is in particular important for large
         trades."324
   (384) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that IDBs and broker-dealers do
         not act as gatekeepers channelling business either on exchanges or OTC.325
                 c. Cscreen is a price discovery mechanism for trades agreed away from exchange
   (385) The Notifying Parties argue in their response to the decision opening the proceedings
         that price discovery platforms such as Cscreen are "powerful and irrefutable examples
         of competition between OTC trading and exchange trading" offering the choice to
         traders to execute their orders on-exchange or OTC and show indications of interest in
         identical ETDs and OTC derivatives.326
   (386) Cscreen is a price discovery bulletin owned by NYX which allows users to post bids
         and offers to selected market participants (rather than the whole market as on exchange)
         and arrange trades on a bilateral basis: on its website, Cscreen presents itself as "an
         ‘electronic broker tool for OTC equity derivatives’. It is used as a bulletin board to
         publish Indications of Interests (IOIs) and trades. There is no automatic matching and
         all trades are finalised over the phone. Cscreen also has a simple chat function where
         brokers and traders can chat with each other in real time".327
   (387) The Cscreen platform is principally used as a matching platform for contracts that could
         not be traded on order book but that can then go directly to exchange clearing via
   323
           [...]*, Response to question 11 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*
   324
           BNPP, agreed minutes of conference call of 16 September 2011, [...]*, paragraph16. See also agreed
           minutes of conference call with GSI of 19 September 2011, [...]*, paragraph11 "ICAP is an interdealer
           broker active as a 'middleman' in the wholesale market where dealers such as GSI interact. Interdealer
           brokers like ICAP are part of the OTC market infrastructure and do not list products in the same way
           as exchanges do".
   325
           It may also be noted that even if this claim of playing a gatekeeper role were true, it would not alter the
           competitive assessment.
   326
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, paragraph 21.
   327
           See Cscreen website, available at https://www.cscreen.com/Cscreen_FAQ.pdf; see also agreed minutes
           of a teleconference call with LSE of 21 September 2011, [...]*.
EN                                                         91                                                          EN

         NYX's connected service Bclear. As a result, it is natural that there is little interest on
         this platform in pure OTC contracts which are typically on OTC platforms.328
   (388) The Notifying Parties suggest that the pricing of ETD contracts and OTC derivatives on
         these platforms is very competitive. However, these are trades that could by nature not
         be executed on order book and thus for listed products offered by Eurex and Liffe, such
         alleged price competition is not relevant as these products are not substitutable to
         ETDs.
   (389) The Commission considers that Csreen services offering price discovery for trades that
         could not be executed on exchange do not indicate competition between ETDs and
         OTC derivatives.
               d. Conclusion
   (390) Therefore, the Commission considers that OTC platforms, interdealer brokers, broker-
         dealers and OTC price discovery platforms operate in a different space than regulated
         exchanges. They generally focus on OTC trades that cannot be executed on exchanges'
         order books as they are either of large size or not standardised enough to be eligible for
         exchange trading. Moreover, those market participants do not perform a gatekeeper
         role. As a result, the existence of these players cannot evidence significant competitive
         interaction between OTC derivatives and ETDs.
                                11.1.1.2.2.1.7.       Broker-dealers cannot be included in the
                                     relevant market via supply-side substitution
   (391) The Notifying Parties claim in their response to the decision opening the proceedings
         and in the response to SO that their largest customers are also their main competitors,
         and hence that these actors should be included in the relevant market.329
   (392) From the outset, it should be noted that broker-dealers offer a different service to
         exchanges. The services offered by these market participants are two-fold: the first type
         of service includes the wholesale trading of derivatives, whilst the second type of
         service consists in brokerage services for wholesale participants. As a result, interdealer
         brokers do not address retail investors in the same way as exchanges.
   (393) Broker-dealers structure bespoke derivatives products which they sell to wholesale
         customers. These contracts are by nature large, customised contracts. The market
         investigation revealed that broker-dealers themselves consider that they address a
         specific segment in the market, offering to their customers trades in customised
         contracts and with flexible funding requirements. For example: "Barclays provides
         clients with an ability to trade equity derivatives with tailored product specifications
         and flexible funding requirements. [...] Barclays provides a service to its clients that is
   328
          The Notifying Parties in their response to the decision opening the proceedings referred to this fact,
          suggesting that this may show tight competition between OTC and ETDs in exchange-traded
          underlyings, paragraph 21.
   329
          Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, paragraph 9,
          Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraphs 17-21. See also section 11.1.1.2.2.1.6
          and 11.1.1.2.2.1.7 of this Decision.
EN                                                     92                                                        EN

         not necessarily in competition with Liffe or Eurex but which compliments (sic) these
         exchanges in fulfilling client execution requirements whilst providing clients with
         alternative solutions where existing exchange contracts do not meet client
         requirements."330
   (394) Moreover, according to the replies that broker-dealer banks provided in the context of
         the second phase market investigation, they consider that they offer a complementary
         service and complementary products to those traded on exchanges.331
   (395) It follows that broker-dealers offer bespoke OTC products for wholesale customers
         whose needs cannot be satisfied through standardised listed contracts. As a result, these
         players operate in a different market. Therefore broker-dealers should not be considered
         as offering competing services within the same relevant markets as the Notifying
         Parties. If they were to seek to offer ETDs in competition with exchanges, they would
         face high barriers to entry characteristic for this market.332
                              11.1.1.2.2.2.      Classification of derivatives according to the underlying asset
                                  class
   (396) The first phase market investigation generally indicated that for most derivatives users,
         the demand to trade derivatives is specific to a certain asset class (or even a specific
         asset within asset classes) and cannot be generally substituted by trades in a different
         asset class.333 More precisely, customers, representing both the sell side and the buy
         side334 of the market generally consider that their trading activity is specific to the
         underlying asset. In this respect, some derivatives users indicated that "different
         underlying fulfils different needs".335 This is because derivatives users typically use
         derivatives for two main purposes, hedging and investing. As concerns customers using
         derivatives contracts for hedging purposes, they seek to hedge a specific risk associated
         with their positions in a certain asset. In this respect, derivatives users indicated that the
         underlying "needs to be the same as the one which is creating the exposure".336 For a
   330
           Barclays, Supplementary Response of 14 September, question 14, [...]*.
   331
           See Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with BNPP of 16 September 2011, [...]*, and agreed
           minutes of conference call with Goldman Sachs of 19 September 2011, [...]*.
   332
           See below section 11.2.1.7.1. of this Decision.
   333
           See replies to questions 29 and 30 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, and to questions 22 and
           23 of Q2 – questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase I. For instance, to
           support the delineation according to the asset class, [one customer]* considers that even "[t]rading
           desks are divided by underlying asset (Equity, Fixed Income, Credit, FX and Commodities), and each
           one of them looks into derivatives usage alternatives on a realistic base for its corresponding asset
           class", reply to question 29 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*.
   334
           The "buy side" is the side of the market comprising (i) institutional investors such as pension funds,
           mutual funds, and hedge funds; (ii) companies with genuine commercial risks, which use derivatives to
           hedge against these risks; and (iii) retail investors. The buy side is the opposite of the "sell side" entities,
           which provide investment services to the buy side. These services encompass a broad range of
           activities, including broking/dealing, investment banking, advisory functions, and investment research.
   335
           Banco BPI S.A., reply to question 30 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*.
   336
           ING Bank N.V., reply to question 29 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*. See also,
           Dexia SA, reply to question 29 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*: "In no case we are
           indifferent towards the underlying asset class as market activities are function of customer flows which
           are very specific in our case. As we try to keep risk mismatches in all their forms under control, we
           obviously will not consider different underlyings to hedge these flows. For the remaining -very small-
EN                                                           93                                                             EN

         position in one specific asset, a derivatives contract on another asset would not provide
         a perfect hedge. Indeed, "[t]he reference asset is the key feature of a risk exposure, and
         therefore of the hedging requirement. Interest rate, FX, equity, commodity and credit
         risk are not fungible in any meaningful way".337 Similarly, users using derivatives
         contracts for leveraged investing purposes are also sensitive to the type of asset in
         which they invest and hence do not generally substitute one asset for another.338
   (397) There are, however, specific types of derivatives users who are more indifferent to the
         type of underlying asset in which they invest and may be more inclined to use different
         derivatives contracts as trading opportunities arise. For instance, algorithmic traders
         that trade with high frequency in and out of derivatives to make profit may be more
         sensitive to other parameters than merely the underlying asset339, although also in this
         case the Notifying Parties have not provided, and nor is there from the market
         investigation, any evidence that these traders, given a particular trading objective,
         choose to trade one instrument rather than another based purely on the commercial
         terms of trading for that instrument available from the exchange.
   (398) The decision opening the proceedings left the question of whether different underlyings
         constitute separate markets open as it concluded that the notified transaction would
         raise serious doubts irrespective of the precise market definition. The Notifying Parties,
         in their response to the decision opening the proceedings, suggested that the market
         should be defined according to the asset class and include all trading venues that do or
         can offer competing products irrespective of their geographic location.340
           part of risk we will consider small macro-hedges (as not all risks can always perfectly be hedged) but
           even in this case our set-up is such that e.g. a fixed income trader will not cover via e.g. DAX-futures. a
           trader will stay within his/her asset-class as we are organised in such a way that no single person has
           access to all asset-classes"; and KBC Bank NV, reply to question 22 of Q2 – questionnaire to
           investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase I, [...]*: "In case of derivative contracts used for
           hedging, the underlying asset is the most important factor since this is determined by the risk that needs
           to be hedged. In other cases (e.g. private banking clients dealing in equity derivatives) the underlying
           asset is more or less "indifferent", and will be determined by the investment strategy and risk appetite of
           the client. Clients need to give specific orders, possibly after advice of their investment adviser".
   337
           [...]*, reply to question 29 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*.
   338
           The importance of the underlyings for leveraged investing purposes is acknowledged by the Notifying
           Parties when they explain that: "derivatives contracts are leveraged, i.e., if the price of an underlying
           asset changes, for the same principal investment, the return from the related derivative position will
           typically be a large multiple of what would be received from the underlying asset's price change. As a
           consequence, derivatives provide leverage and are a more capital-efficient way of gaining exposure to
           an underlying asset." (Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.9).
   339
           Kyte Group, reply to question 29 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I [...]* sating that "Our
           traders and customers are concerned about the characteristics of the derivative product itself rather
           than the underlying asset. The derivative will be popular if it is liquid, has a high 'tick' value (ie The
           price difference between each incremental price step), has a manageable overall cost of trading, has
           decent daily volume, has significant open interest,". This is also argued by the Notifying Parties in the
           Form CO, suggesting that users that use derivatives for investing purposes are "more indifferent to the
           specific underlying and are primarily seeking trading opportunities associated with spreads and
           volatility". See Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.5.
   340
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, Derivatives
           market definition, paragraph 5.
EN                                                          94                                                         EN

   (399) The Commission, in the SO,341 preliminarily concluded that derivatives markets should
         indeed be defined according to asset classes and analysed the effects of the notified
         transaction on that basis. The Commission also considers that it would be inappropriate
         to define markets on a narrower basis, that is "per contract" basis. This is because
         customers implement trading strategies based not on a single contract but on a portfolio
         of contracts within an asset class. In addition, contracts within one asset class are
         closely correlated which suggests that the boundaries of the relevant markets are closely
         linked to the margin groups within which the Notifying Parties apply cross-margining.
   (400) The Notifying Parties mainly offer derivatives contracts on the following underlyings:
                 - European interest rates which can be subdivided into long-term interest rates
                      ("LTIR") or capital market rates and short-term interest rates ("STIR") or
                      money market rates;
                 - European single stocks that can be further subdivided according to the
                      underlying stock;
                 - European equity indices (at pan-European and national level); and
                 - to a very limited extent commodities.342
                                 11.1.1.2.2.2.1.         European interest rate derivatives
   (401)     Eurex and Liffe both offer exchange trading and clearing in STIR and LTIR options
         and futures, based in particular on Eurozone and UK interest rates. LTIR are based on
         government debt securities in which the sovereign debt issuer owes the holder a debt and
         is obliged to repay the principal an interest. STIR derivatives, on the other hand, are based
         on commercial interbank rates at which banks offer to lend unsecured funds to other banks
         in the wholesale money market. Liffe has accumulated liquidity in European STIR
         options and futures as well as UK rates (both short and long term) while Eurex has built
         up liquidity in European LTIR options and futures and in Swiss long-term interest
         rates.343 Specifically, Liffe's landmark STIR products are 3 month Euribor future and
         options344 and Eurex's most traded products include Bund, Bobl and Schatz which are
         each based on a basket of German sovereign debt. While Liffe also offers some LTIR
         products based on sterling, Eurex is not present in sterling and hence Liffe and Eurex
         only overlap in two STIR contracts, Euribor and Eonia.
   341
           See SO, paragraphs 39 and 151.
   342
           Given the limited overlap between the Notifying Parties' activities in the area of commodity derivatives
           and the number of exchanges active in that area, the Notifying Parties' overlap in this area is not within
           the scope of this Decision and hence will not be discussed further.
   343
           There is little liquid trading in derivatives on European interest rates denominated outside of these
           reference currencies.
   344
           Euribor futures are derivatives contracts having an underlying instrument Euribor, i.e. the rate at which
           Euro interbank term deposits are offered by one prime bank to another prime bank within the Economic
           and Monetary Union zone. Euribor options are derivatives contracts having as underlying an Euribor
           future.
EN                                                        95                                                          EN

   (402) In the Form CO, the Notifying Parties argue that if derivatives markets were to be
         distinguished by asset class,345 then STIR and LTIR constitute different markets. The
         decision opening the proceedings left the question as to whether interest rate derivatives
         should be further subdivided into LTIR and STIR derivatives open as it concluded that
         the notified transaction raised serious doubts in the area of interest rate derivatives
         irrespective of the precise market definition. The SO, while it concluded that STIR and
         LTIR derivatives most likely belong to the same product market, stated that
         competition concerns with respect to interest rate derivatives would arise even if STIR
         and LTIR were to be part of different markets.346
   (403) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties strongly contested the possibility that
         STIR and LTIR could be included in the same relevant market. Specifically, the
         Notifying Parties argued that as STIR contracts are based on European interbank
         lending rates and LTIR contracts are based on government debt, they are by no means
         substitutable for derivatives traders seeking to hedge interest rate exposures. Similarly,
         for customers that use derivatives for other purposes than hedging such as algorithmic
         traders, spread traders and market makers, these contracts are traded according to
         different patterns, with distinct market models and matching algorithms and hence are
         not substitutable form their point of view.347 The Notifying Parties also argued that for
         these categories of traders STIR and LTIR based on dollars are closer substitutes to
         respective Euro-based STIR and LTIR derivatives than are Euro-based STIR and LTIR
         one to the other.348 According to the Notifying Parties349, OTC-traded forward rate
         agreements and interest rate swaps are closer substitutes for Euribor futures as they
         share the same reference fixed interest rate and allow traders to achieve the same
         economic exposure to the Euro money market yield curve.350
                a. Exchange-traded interest rate derivatives are intrinsically linked to a specific
                    currency
   (404) First, the Commission notes that exchange-traded interest rate derivatives products have an
         intrinsic link with the currency on which the underlying is based. In this respect, European
         IR derivatives and US IR derivatives offer exposures to European and US interest rates
         respectively which by their very nature cannot be considered as substitutes from a demand
         perspective, although they may be correlated to some extent.351 For instance, margin
   345
           The Notifying Parties' overall position is nevertheless that the relevant market is one global risk
           management market. See Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.255 et seq.
   346
           SO, paragraph 56. The Notifying Parties have acknowledged their understanding that the concerns as
           specified in the SO in the area of European interest rate derivatives arise irrespective of the market
           definition. In this respect, […]* of NYX stated at the Oral Hearing, that "We keep hearing through the
           SO and the case team presentation that even if [LTIR and STIR] are different markets there is still a
           competition issue to answer. If they are different markets with different participants using different
           technology to trade, it's very hard to make this conclusion, and I think you really need to think of the
           kind of analysis that would lead to that conclusion, and I think that we feel that it is misplaced" (,[…]*,
           see recording of Oral Hearing, 27 October, morning 2.13.00).
   347
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Interest rate derivatives, paragraph 1.
   348
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Interest rate derivatives, paragraph 31.
   349
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Interest rate derivatives, paragraph 50.
   350
           The yield curve is the relation between the interest rate or cost of borrowing in a given currency and its
           time to maturity.
   351
           See replies to question 42 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, and 32 of Q2 questionnaire to
           investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase I. For example: Banco Santander Totta SA, reply to
EN                                                        96                                                           EN

         offsets, which are themselves based on correlation, between Dollar and Euro-based rates
         are relatively limited. For instance, between Euro-based Euribor and Dollar-based
         Eurodollar Liffe offers an offset of [<50]*%352 while CME offers up to 50%.353 These
         offsets are substantially higher between two Euro-based interest rate products, reaching
         [>50]*%.
   (405) In this context, an investor who wishes to get an exposure to European interest rates will
         not be able to do so by trading Eurodollars futures354 and conversely, an investor wishing
         to get exposure to US interest rates will not be able to do so by trading Euribor futures.355
         This was confirmed in the market investigation where customers explained that given the
         differences in underlying economies on which interest rates are based, derivatives based
         on different currencies are not substitutable. In this regard, one respondent explained that
         "rate expectations, based on very different economies, are not the same and therefore a
         derivative based on Euribor cannot substitute one based on Eurodollar and viceversa".356
         Similarly, "Euribor futures/options and Eurodollar futures/options are by no means
         substitutable because the monetary policies from ECB and Federal Reserve are by no
         means comparable (different mandates). Exception: when a major disaster happens like
         9/11 but even then, correlation of STIR futures is lower than correlation of bond
         futures".357
   (406) It follows that interest rate products, be they short-term or long-term, based on different
         currencies are not generally substitutable. The same would also apply to euro and
         sterling-based interest rate derivatives.
                b. STIR derivatives v LTIR derivatives
   (407) LTIR are based on government debt securities in which the sovereign debt issuer owes the
         holder a debt and is obliged to repay the principal an interest. STIR derivatives, on the
         other hand, are based on commercial interbank rates at which banks offer to lend
         unsecured funds to other banks in the wholesale money market. This basic distinction
         gives rise to the terms "capital market derivatives" as opposed to "money market
         derivatives". Also on this basis, the Notifying Parties argue that STIR and LTIR
         derivatives are products based on different underlyings and hence used to hedge a different
           question 42 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*, refers that "generally speaking, those
           two kind of instruments are positively correlated meaning that it might be the case that some investors
           consider using them interchangeably. However, it is a fact that the exposure is not the same as
           sovereign interest/credit rate curves are different, proved clearly by the recent crisis. Moreover, one
           has also to take into consideration the FX risk"; and WestLB AG, reply to question 42 of Q1 –
           questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]* considers that "although interest rates may move in the same
           direction, they cannot be considered as substitutes where differing currencies".
   352
           Notifying Parties response to the RFI of 13 September 2011, annex 12.
   353
           See section 11.2.1.4.3.5.1 of this Decision.
   354
           Eurodollar futures are derivatives contracts having as the underlying instrument time deposits
           denominated in U.S. dollars at banks outside the United States, called Eurodollar Time Deposits.
           Eurodollar Options are derivatives contracts having as underlying a Eurodollar future.
   355
           See replies to question 43 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, and 33 of Q2 questionnaire to
           investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase I.
   356
           Fineco S.p.A., reply to question 43 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*, original text: "le
           aspettative sui tassi, basandosi su Economie assolutamente diverse, non sono le stesse e quindi un prodotto
           derivato sull'Euribor non può sostituire uno sull'Eurodollar e viceversa".
   357
           Dexia SA, reply to question 43 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*.
EN                                                          97                                                          EN

         kind of exposure. This makes these two groups of products in the Notifying Parties' view
         not substitutable.358
   (408) While this argument is in direct contradiction to the Notifying Parties' overarching claim
         that the relevant market in the area of derivatives is one overall market for "global risk
         transfer" where all derivatives of all asset classes and all types compete with and
         constrain each other, the Commission analysed the substitutability between STIR and
         LTIR from the point of view of derivatives users.
   (409) During the market investigation, as the Notifying Parties correctly pointed out, the
         majority of sell side (wholesale) customers indicated that STIR and LTIR derivatives
         are not substitutable for their use.359 However, the market investigation also indicated
         there was no hard-and-fast consensus among market participants as to where one
         category began and the other ended, and that the Notifying Parties compete in providing
         exposure to short and medium term interest rates. Indeed, the market investigation in
         this Decision showed that the boundary between STIR and LTIR derivatives is
         becoming increasingly blurred. In this context, one market participant noted that there
         is "some blurring in the distinction between LTIR and STIR (e.g. Liffe's longest STIR
         contract is 3 years, which is longer than the shortest LTIR contract offered by
         EUREX)."360 Similarly, another market participant pointed out that "The exchanges
         generally operate at different points on the yield curve, Liffe short end and Eurex long,
         but in the medium term they certainly compete, contracts such as the schatz and bobl
         competing with Liffe's STIR contracts for participants looking for exposure in these
         sectors. More recently Eurex competed with Liffe on STIR options and part of that
         competition was based on trading fees."361The Notifying Parties in this respect indicate
         that LTIR products cover "approximately" two years to ten years, whereas STIR
         derivatives "classically have short term (i.e. one year or less) interest rates as their
         underlying"362 suggesting that the term of the contract may not be such a reliable
         criterion on which to separate STIR from LTIR derivatives.
   (410) The gradual extension along the yield curve is also confirmed by the Notifying Parties'
         internal documents. For instance, while Liffe offers futures and options only on one and
         three month (that is short term) interest rates – namely Eonia and Euribor – it offers
         Euribor rates 24 quarters forward, that is to say six years, thereby offering interest rate
         exposure well into the maturity period of Eurex's two and five year benchmark products,
         the Schatz and Bobl. As NYX itself says: "We are continually expanding and developing
         our product range of STIR options to encourage market growth and bring new
         opportunities to the market. To extend our STIR options portfolio, in 2009 we launched
         two-year mid-curve options in the Euribor and Short Sterling options contracts. These
         products give you access to longer-dated interest rates. Following the success of two new
   358
           Form CO, Derivatives section, paragraph 7.34.
   359
           See responses to question 33 of Q1- Questionnaire to customers and to question 27 of Q2 –
           Questionnaire to Q2 – questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase .1
   360
           ICE, response to question 15 of Q 3 – Questionnaire to competitors, [...]*.
   361
           DRW Investments UK Limited, response to question 55 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*. See
           also reply of ICAP [...]* to the same question explaining that "At the margins there is also some
           competition between different contracts: for example a 'strip' or 'stack' of Euribor STIR futures vs a
           schatz contract."
   362
           Although in fact Eurex also lists a longer maturity product, the Buxl.
EN                                                        98                                                      EN

         serial expiry months in standard Euribor options, we also introduced additional serial
         expiry months in the Euribor one-year mid-curve options in early 2010. This has enhanced
         the trading and hedging opportunities, with market participants able to benefit from
         longer-term exposure."363 This indeed indicates that some STIR products may be designed
         in a way to offer longer term exposures suggesting that there is a certain level of
         substitutability between the two groups of products.
   (411) Although spot and close expiry money market rates may diverge from capital market rates
         as a result of conditions in interbank markets, longer term expectations of money market
         rates are much more reliably linked to expectations of capital market rates, such that the
         further out a position goes, the more closely price movements track each other. In reality
         there is a series of maturities on the interest rate yield curve from short term to long
         term, including for STIR well into the future.364
   (412) In addition, given the strong correlation between contracts with comparable maturities,
         especially going forward, evidence shows that the Notifying Parties could, have often
         tried to, and to some extent have been successful in extending their product offering
         towards the other end of the curve (that is to say where they have traditionally been less
         successful in building up liquidity), a prospect which is possible inter alia because of
         their ability to provide offsets with correlated contracts.365 In particular, Liffe has been
         steadily expanding towards providing longer term interest rate exposure and […]*.366
         Besides the overlaps in offering exposure to medium maturities, Eurex and Liffe
         overlap in a number of STIR options and futures. Although liquidity in each particular
         instrument is generally concentrated on one of the respective platforms,367 as further
         discussed in the competitive assessment Section below, Eurex is nonetheless reported
         by several respondents, including by NYX itself, to have in the recent past been
         aggressively marketing its Euribor offering.
   (413) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties, while acknowledging the existence of
         a continuum of maturities along the interest rate yield curve,368 brought forward
         additional arguments in support of their claim that STIR and LTIR belong to separate
         product markets. First, the Notifying Parties recall that STIR and LTIR derivatives are
   363
           See NYX' website, available at http://globalderivatives.nyx.com/en/stirs/nyse-liffe/stirs-options, (29
           September 2011).
   364
           It is therefore possible to hedge against what the level of the three month euro interbank lending rate
           will be at points 3, 6, 9, 12 etc months in the future, up to five years into the future.
   365
           The highest offset on LCH Clearnet amongst interest rate products is provided for Eonia vs Euribor
           ([>50]*%), but second is short against medium gilts ([>50]*%). 3 month sterling is offset for [>50]*%
           against long gilts. LCH also offsets 3 month Euribor for [>50]*% against the ten year Euro swapnote
           and offsets Euribor for [>50]*% against long gilts, i.e. long dated sterling government debt. It is
           therefore safe to assume that an offset of [70-80]*% would be possible between Euribor and the Schatz
           or Bobl. On Eurex, arrangements for margining are more complex but an offset factor of at least [40-
           50]*% applies between all fixed income products except for Swiss products (see the reply to the
           Commission's second RFI of 13 September 2001 (Annex 12 for NYX)). In addition, the Notifying
           Parties themselves argue that there are cross-margining benefits from combining the short and long end
           of the curve: ".[…]*. ("Cross-margining efficiencies induced by the Deutsche Börse / NYSE Euronext
           merger" - 5 September 2011, page 11).
   366
           .[…]*.
   367
           See Annex 4, tab 2, of the Notifying Parties' response to the Commission's first RFI of 13 September
           2011.
   368
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest rate derivatives, paragraph 6.
EN                                                          99                                                     EN

         based on different underlyings which means that they are not substitutable for
         customers hedging their exposure in a certain asset class.369 In support of this claim, the
         Notifying Parties provided an analysis showing that the hedging exposure in German
         bonds (LTIR) with derivatives on the interbank yield curve (STIR) results in basis risk
         which means that the hedge is not perfect.370 Additionally, the Notifying Parties argue
         that STIR and LTIR are matched using different algorithms which make them not
         substitutable even for traders that are less sensitive to the nature of the underlying.
         STIRs are matched using pro rata style algorithms; LTIR are matched using price/time
         style algorithms and are "front month traded" (namely the vast majority of trading takes
         place in the closest contract to maturity).371
   (414) At the Oral Hearing, while this was generally confirmed by [a]* trader that the
         Notifying Parties invited to be part of their presentation, the same company did not
         fully exclude substitutability between STIRs and LTIRs in their response to the
         Commission's market investigation. In this respect at the Oral Hearing, [this trader]*
         stated that "In our opinion Euribor and German Government bond futures have a
         different underlying and are in our opinion distinct markets".372 However, in
         responding to the Commission's first phase market investigation questionnaire some
         months earlier, [the same trader]* had stated that "it is well known that they are
         correlated and show similar behaviour" and that "STIR and LTIR can be considered as
         substitutes. To replicate a LTIR using a STIR is possible. The underlying interest rates
         are not identical, but reasonably related".373
   (415) The Notifying Parties argue that OTC-traded forward rate agreements and interest rate
         swaps are closer substitutes for Euribor futures as, notably, STIR futures and short to
         medium term interest rate swaps are linked to each other due to the fact that STIR
         futures prices are used to price swaps. In support of this claim, they refer to TriOptima
         data showing that 60% of interest rate swaps are plain vanilla contracts and that over
         50% of interest rate swaps are centrally cleared. In the Notifying Parties' view, this
         would demonstrate that a rigid distinction between OTC and ETDs based on the level
         of standardisation should not be followed.374
   (416) However the market investigation revealed that unlike a futures contract, most OTC
         derivatives, being structured as swaps, require periodic payments between the parties
         based on the relative value or price change of the fixed and floating legs of that
         transaction. OTC derivatives typically "swap" cash flows, whereas ETDs oblige
         settlement of a single exchange of assets or cash at a fixed point in the "future". Also,
         euro denominated interest rate swaps are based on the comparison between a negotiated
         fixed rate of interest and external reference price such a LIBOR, whereas
         bund/bobl/schatz contracts are euro interest rate sensitive and can therefore be used as
         an interest rate hedge. In addition, OTC interest rate swaps are generally traded in five,
   369
           However, as explained in more detail in the competitive assessment section, unlike equity and equity
           index derivatives, the interest rate market is characterised by the fact that certain liquid benchmark
           products are widely used for hedging purposes even if they offer only an imperfect hedge.
   370
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest rate derivatives, paragraph 16.
   371
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest rate derivatives, paragraph 10.
   372
           See Notifying Parties' presentation at the Oral Hearing, 27 October 2011, slide 57.
   373
           [...]*, response to question 33 of Q1- questionnaire to customer – Phase 1, [...]*.
   374
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Interest rate derivatives, paragraphs 50-60.
EN                                                        100                                                     EN

         seven, or ten year tenor, while ETDs are held for a shorter period as they are chosen in
         order to make short-term offsets of risk exposure through hedging or position taking.
         Moreover, the fact that OTC derivatives can and have benefited from greater
         standardisation, clearing and electronic trading does not alter the different function and
         nature of the asset class. Such standardisation in fact, as already expressed in detail in
         Recitals (272) et seq. above, does not cover the key economic terms of the contracts
         which characterise the OTC derivatives.375
   (417) In relation to the specific claims of the Notifying Parties regarding forward rate
         agreements, these, like any OTC contract, are traded very differently, in much larger
         sizes, and predominantly in order to hedge or gain exposure to interest rates on a non-
         standard date. Although they often are centrally cleared, being treated as a single-period
         swap with the possibility of margin offset in the Swapclear pool of LCH Clearnet, there
         is no pool of fungible open interest in particular contract dates. Neither Liffe nor Eurex
         offers either trading or clearing of flexible Euribor futures376. The general conclusions
         above relating to the fundamental difference between OTC and ETD trading therefore
         also apply in the case of Forward Rate Agreements.
   (418) Finally, the Notifying Parties point out an alleged inconsistency between the
         Commission's "overlap" theory for bringing the Notifying Parties' main STIR and LTIR
         derivatives together into a single market and the Commission's treatment of OTC
         derivatives in relation to exchange-traded derivatives.377 This comparison is misleading.
         Indeed while on the one hand the Commission comes to the conclusion that the frontier
         between STIR and LTIR is blurred, on the other hand, the line between OTC traded
         derivatives and ETDs is not blurred as seen in the relevant Section above. This is in line
         with the conclusion on the existence of a limited set of derivatives traded OTC that
         present some of the ETDs characteristics.
   (419) The Commission has analysed carefully the evidence brought about by the Notifying
         Parties and acknowledges that there may be some valid reasons to consider that STIR
         and LTIR belong to separate markets. However, and in particular in view of the blurred
         boundaries between STIR and LTIR, the Commission considers that splitting interest
         rate derivatives between these two groups based on the nature of the underlying
         (sovereign versus commercial rate) and their place on the yield curve may not fully
         reflect the reality of the market. However, it can be left open for the purpose of this
         Decision whether the market for listed interest rate derivatives should be further
         subdivided into short-term and long-term interest derivatives as the competitive
         assessment of this Decision with respect to interest rate derivatives would remain the
         same. This is because, as detailed in the competitive assessment Section of this
         Decision, the notified transaction would eliminate the closest actual and potential
         competitor regardless of whether there is a single market for trading and clearing of
         European interest rate derivatives or this market is divided between STIR and LTIR.
   375
           ICAP, observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011, paragraphs 6.5 and 6.13
           [...]*.
   376
           As noted at Recital (1)(a)(672) of this Decision, Eurex did offer flexible Euribor options (but not
           futures) for a period but withdrew this product in January 2011.
   377
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest rate derivatives, paragraphs 47-49.
EN                                                        101                                                  EN

         The same would apply if one were to divide the relevant market by currency of the
         underlying interest rate.
                                  11.1.1.2.2.2.2.        European single equity derivatives
   (420) Eurex and Liffe both offer single stock options and futures based on the shares of a
         number of leading European companies. Their contracts overlap in particular as
         concerns Dutch, French, Belgian, German and UK companies, such as for instance
         Unilever, BNP Paribas, Deutsche Bank, etc., but there are also overlaps in blue chip
         companies of other European countries as described further in the competitive
         assessment Section below. For derivatives on equity underlyings within their "core"
         home markets, the Notifying Parties face little competition other than the other Party,
         whereas for contracts on underlyings from outside this zone – such as Nordic, Italian
         and Spanish underlyings – the respective national exchange is usually a competing
         provider.
   (421) Single equity derivatives are typically used to hedge positions in single stock equities or
         as a leveraged investment tool into a particular company. As a result, from the demand
         side perspective, strictly speaking, there is no substitution between different single
         stock derivatives378. In this regard, the significant majority of respondents to the market
         investigation confirmed that, to get exposure to a specific single stock, only derivatives
         in that particular stock would be considered.379 Indeed, "a single stock exposure to a
         specific company cannot be substituted in full with another underlying. Usually only a
         single stock derivative ensure a 1:1 exposure. Basic risk on single name is too high for
         cross hedges in most cases".380
   (422) However, traders do not just buy once a single equity derivatives contract, but often
         implement trading strategies, for instance covering a number of single stock equity
         derivatives within one country or industry. This is because concentrating correlated
         contracts on one exchange increases the cross-margining opportunities in the
         exchange's CCP as well as offering operational trading advantages.
   (423) The market investigation also showed that the boundaries of these strategies are those of
         geographic areas such as Europe or the US. In this context, a market participant stated
         that "[f]rom a customer perspective they would not consider European equity
         derivatives to be substitutable with other equity derivatives in other geographic
         regions."381 Likewise, another market participant stated that "Derivatives having
         European equity […] underlyings are mainly used to achieve a financial exposure to
   378
          This differs from the situation in respect of interest rates where, as explained, the primacy of liquidity
          over hedging accuracy gives rise to a continuum.
   379
          See replies to question 45 of and to question 35 of Q2 - questionnaire to investment firms and retail
          intermediaries – Phase I.
   380
          BVI, response to question 34 of Q2 - questionnaire to investment firms and retail intermediaries – Phase
          I, [...]*; see also The Kyte Group, response to question 44 of Q1- questionnaire to customers – Phase I,
          [...]*, explaining that: "One single stock derivative cannot be used to hedge a different underlying single
          stock. The only time that they be substitutable is if the trade is in a different type of product based on
          the SAME underlying stock (eg A warrant versus an option)".
   381
          ICAP, response to question 44 of Q1- questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*.
EN                                                        102                                                         EN

         European equity […]. Thus they are not substitutable investments to derivatives having
         as underlying other equity […] (e.g. US, Japanese etc.)."382
   (424) From the supply-side perspective, there are no intellectual property (IP) rights
         associated with single stock derivatives and therefore any European derivatives
         exchange can technically start listing single stock derivatives without particular
         investment and at short notice.383 Derivatives exchanges regularly add new single stock
         derivatives to complete their product portfolio and attract customers by increasing the
         potential for margin efficiencies.
   (425) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties contend that there is a single relevant
         market for trading of single equity derivatives, including both exchange trading and
         OTC trading384. The Notifying Parties claim that the phenomenon of ETD lookalikes is
         particularly pronounced as concerns single equity derivatives and for this reason should
         be included in the relevant market.385 However, as already explained in Recitals (310)et
         seq. above, lookalikes of listed products in their size and shape are by nature a limited
         phenomenon that is available only to a limited portion of customers. This is also in line
         with the findings in the TABB study showing that equity-linked derivatives (including
         both single equity and equity indices)386 represent only 1% of notional values traded
         OTC while they represent 8% of notional value traded ETD. According to TABB, this
         is explained by the fact that ETD and OTC equity linked derivatives do not serve the
         same purpose: "ETD equity-linked notional open interest is several times the proportion
         of OTCD equities because they generally serve different purposes: OTCD - hedging for
         physical asset holders; ETD – trading and investment for asset managers and
         individuals."387 This is in line with the Commission's analysis of substitutability
         between ETDs and OTC derivatives in Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.5 above.
   (426) Therefore, the Commission considers that it can be left open for the purpose of this
         Decision whether the market for listed single stock equity futures and options should be
         subdivided according to the individual stock or should comprise a wider set of stocks
         up to and including options and futures on all European single stocks as, irrespective of
         the conclusion on this point, the notified transaction is likely to give rise to a significant
         impediment of effective competition with respect to European single stock equity
         derivatives under all alternative market definitions, that is be they considered on
         individual, national or European levels.
   382
           Amundi Asset Management, response to question 34 of Q2 - questionnaire to investment firms and
           retail intermediaries – Phase I, [...]*. See also BANCA IMI S.p.A., response to question 44 of Q1-
           questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*, saying that "In nessuna circostanza i derivati aventi come
           underlying azioni europee sono sostituibili a quelli aventi come underlying azioni US o JP. Possono
           essere al limite usati come proxy hedge ma lasciano un rischio di base aperto."
   383
           See NASDAQ OMX, response to question 25 of Q3 – questionnaire to competitors – Phase I, [...]*,
           explaining that, for an exchange already offering derivatives on some national single stocks,"[f]rom a
           technical point of view, [it] may theoretically be possible" to start offering, derivatives on single stocks
           listed on exchanges in (other) European countries. See also LSEG, response to question 25 of Q3 –
           questionnaire to competitors – Phase I, [...]*.
   384
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Single equity derivatives, paragraph 11.
   385
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Single equity derivatives, paragraph 8 et seq.
   386
           As concerns equity linked derivatives, index derivatives account for a majority of these derivatives in
           terms of notional value and volume traded.
   387
           TABB Report, slide 13.
EN                                                         103                                                          EN

                                   11.1.1.2.2.2.3.        European equity index derivatives
   (427) Eurex and Liffe offer trading and clearing of equity index futures and options based on
         pan-European and national indices. Eurex's flagship products are derivatives on the
         pan-European EUROSTOXX 50 index, STOXX pan-European sectoral indices and the
         German DAX indices,388 while Liffe offers trading of derivatives based mainly on the
         UK FTSE 100, the French CAC 40, and the Dutch AEX indices389. Due to trademarks
         and other IP rights associated with most of these products, the Notifying Parties offer
         derivatives based on different indices, except for some Japanese and Indian national
         indices where their trading volumes are insignificant.390
   (428) From the demand-side perspective, the individual indices are not considered
         substitutable as they offer different exposures. Indeed, the market investigation
         confirmed that the majority of customers do not consider various European indices or
         national indices as substitutable.391 For example, a market participant outlined that
         "[u]nfortunately the indices are not substitutable (sic) because they are demanded by
         the clients specifically. We are not in the positions of pharmacist who can prescribe
         generics. Our clients will only buy the branded indices"392 while another noted that "the
         underlying indices have different constituents, thus different performance and hence
         while at the superficial level they are both "pan European Equity indices" for any given
         trade one index or the other will be the appropriate benchmark and thus they are in no
         way substitutable."393
   (429) Similarly to single stock equity derivatives, index derivatives are by their very nature
         tied to a geographic region as they are used to get exposure to a basket of equities in a
         certain region. In this respect, one respondent indicated that "Derivatives having
         European equity or equity index underlyings are mainly used to achieve a financial
         exposure to European equity or equity index. Thus they are not substitutable
         investments to derivatives having as underlying other equity or equity index (e.g. US,
         Japanese etc.)."394
   388
           Eurex's derivatives based on other indices account for […]*% of the average daily volume ("ADV") for
           options and […]*% for futures.
   389
           Liffe's derivatives based on other indices account for less than […]*% of the ADV for options and
           […]*% for futures.
   390
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 7.126.
   391
           Replies to question 89 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers - derivatives – Phase II. For instance, Liquid
           Capital Mangement [...]* noted that "They share some traits on a more macro basis but are
           fundamentally different as they are both based on completely different underlyings". Similarly, [...]*
           stated that major European index derivatives are "based on different set of underlyings and so are not
           substitutable."
   392
           BNP Paribas Arbitrage SNC, response to question 35 of Q1- questionnaire to customers – Phase I,
           [...]*. see also the responses to the same question by BANCA IMI S.p.A., "Riteniamo che nessun equity
           index derivatives sia perfettamente sostituibile con un altro anche se solo parzialmente diverso; un
           indice può al limite essere un proxy hedge di un altro indice lasciando però aperto il rischio di base tra
           i 2 indici. Il trading equity di BancaIMI cerca come copertura indici perfettamente sostituibili (cioè lo
           stesso)" [...]*, and Finecobank S.P.A., "Riteniamo che ogni sottostante abbia le sue caratteristiche e
           peculiarita', di conseguenza e' poco realistico ipotizzare di sostiuire un prodotto derivato con un altro",
           [...]*.
   393
           [...]*, response to question 89 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers- derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
   394
           Amundi Asset Management, response to question 34 of Q2 - Questionnaire to investment firms and
           retail intermediaries – Phase I, [...]*. See also BANCA IMI S.p.A., response to question 46 of Q1-
EN                                                        104                                                          EN

   (430) From the supply side perspective, the indices are usually protected by IP rights and
         therefore whilst it may be possible to reproduce the composition of an index,395 its
         brand name cannot, at least at present, be freely used396. Such an index would therefore
         need first to gain credibility in the market, in particular on the part of asset managers
         developing funds which are based on or incorporate the relevant index. In this respect,
         the market investigation showed that "there are very limited alternatives to existing
         European equity index derivatives. In order to effect entry successfully, a new entrant
         would need to be able to list popular ETDs on its trading platform, which would entail
         either obtaining a licence to use an existing benchmark or creating a new benchmark.
         Broadly-speaking, the creation of a new benchmark as a realistic alternative is not a
         viable option given that market participants often wish to trade the established index
         product. A new entrant would also need to offer a clearing service to customers
         enabling them to offset margin payments from their existing ETDs transactions."397 In
         addition, it is extremely difficult to replicate an index,398 since the calculation of an
         index includes certain elements, such as the treatment of certain corporate actions, the
         handling of which is partly at the discretion of the index provider.
   (431) Therefore, it is concluded for the purpose of this Decision that, in view of separate and
         non-overlapping IP rights, which neither Notifying Party presently has licensed to the
         other and which the Notifying Parties have argued they would not have an incentive to
         do, separate relevant product markets exist for the trading and clearing of each of the
         Notifying Parties' families of existing equity indices (national and pan-European).
   (432) However, there nonetheless exists competition between the Notifying Parties, as well as
         competition with third Parties, in respect of innovation in the area of new European index
         products, both national and pan-European. Given the high degree of correlation between
         the various European indices with resulting possibilities for significant margin offset
         between them, as well as technical similarities in how they are constructed and traded, this
          questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*, saying that "In nessuna circostanza i derivati aventi come
          underlying indici europei sono sostituibili a quelli aventi come underlying altri indici. Possono essere
          al limite usati come proxy hedge ma lasciano un rischio di base aperto".
   395
          Knight Capital Europe Limited, in its response to question 35 of Q1- questionnaire to customers –
          Phase I, [...]*, outlined that there is no European equity index derivatives which is substitutable to
          another "[b]ecause equity index derivatives require licensing from the index licensor (DB and NYSE) to
          list, the existing and anticipated future instruments would not be readily fungible or substitutable".
   396
          Under the Commission proposal of 20 October 2011 for "MiFID II", this situation may change. Since
          this proposal is not yet enacted, and in its final form may differ in some respects from the existing
          proposal, it is not relevant to the assessment of the proposed transaction under the EUMR.
   397
          AFME, response to question 35 of Q1- questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]* (AFME is the trade
          association of participants in the wholesale European financial markets, including banks, corporate
          finance advisors, and brokers, i.e. the largest customers of the Notifying Parties).
   398
          See Agreed minutes of meeting with AFME of 24 August 2011, paragraph 11, [...]*: "Copying a
          market-leading index under a white label (such as "Europe 50" instead of EuroStoxx 50) may not
          infringe trademark rights but isn't a real alternative: it is rather, in investors' eyes, an unproven
          substitute since it cannot be guaranteed that the copied index is the same since there remains a degree
          of discretion in the operation of indices in the event, for instance, of system outages and corporate
          actions, due to which basis risk would still arise. Even if comparable liquidity and a collateral pool
          were available, such basis risk would likely outweigh any benefits from reduced trading and/or clearing
          fees. Investors' mandates often preclude using any alternative indices since they would be unwilling to
          jeopardize their hedging by using a different index and even if they were willing to do so they have little
          if any incentive". See also Nasdaq OMX, response to question 79 of Q10 – questionnaire to
          competitors, Phase II [...]*.
EN                                                        105                                                         EN

         type of innovation competition occurs in a wider market encompassing all European
         equity indices, both national and pan-European.
                          11.1.1.2.2.3.     Classification of derivatives according to their relationship
                              with the underlying
   (433) According to the Notifying Parties, to the extent that the markets should be considered on
         the basis of underlying asset classes, options and futures should be distinguished as they
         have, in their words, somewhat different characteristics.399
   (434) The three most common types of derivatives contracts are options, futures/forwards, and
         swaps.
   (435) An option is a financial contract between two parties whereby the buyer acquires (against
         payment of a premium) the right, but not the obligation, to buy (call) or sell (put) a
         specified amount of the underlying at a specific "strike price" on or before a specified
         expiration date. Options may be traded on exchange or OTC. Listed options are
         standardised according to parameters such as the quality, quantity, delivery time, and
         strike price levels.400 Options can take different forms, among which the two most
         common are call options (which provide the holder the right to purchase an asset for a
         specified price) and put options (which provide the holder the right to sell an asset for a
         specified price). The strike price of a call (put) option is the contractual price at which the
         asset will be purchased (sold) in the event that the option is exercised. The last date on
         which an option can be exercised is called the expiration date.
   (436) A future/forward is a financial contract between two parties to buy or sell the underlying
         (or its cash equivalent) on a specified future date at a price agreed at the time of the
         conclusion of the contract. Contrary to the option contract, the futures contract obliges the
         buyer to purchase an asset or the seller to sell an asset. Futures are standardised listed
         products while “forwards” are traded OTC. Futures are the most liquid products on
         exchange. Although a futures contract technically calls for delivery of an asset, such
         delivery is normally replaced by the parties to the contract closing out their positions
         before contract maturity and taking gains or losses in cash.
   (437) Futures contracts have linear payoffs so that the losses as well as the profits for the buyer
         and the seller of a futures contract are unlimited. This is not the case for options since the
         losses for the buyer of an option are limited, whereas the profits are potentially unlimited.
   (438) Swaps are agreements between two parties to exchange a sequence of cash flows over a
         period of time. Swaps may be viewed as portfolios of forward contracts. Each transaction
         may be viewed as a separate forward agreement. The swap price is an average of the
         forward prices. The Notifying Parties note that swaps have historically been traded
         exclusively OTC and attempts by exchanges to launch swaps as listed derivatives have so
         far been largely unsuccessful in attracting significant liquidity.401
   399
          Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.259.
   400
          Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.42.
   401
          Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.46
EN                                                   106                                                  EN

   (439) The market investigation has indicated that options, futures and swaps constitute
         fundamentally different instruments used for different purposes. In particular, the market
         investigation pointed to the fact that swaps may constitute a separate category due to their
         different characteristics, use and environment in which they are traded.402 Indeed, "While a
         future contract fixes the price for a single point in time, a swap locks in a level today for
         several future dates. In case a trader would want to achieve a risk exposure using futures
         similar to [that which]* could be achieved by entering into an interest rate swap, the
         trader would be exposed to the cost of carrying the futures position, and would need to
         regularly roll the futures position as liquidity of futures contracts past the front end is very
         thin".403 Similarly, ICAP, an interdealer broker operating an OTC trading platform trading
         primarily swaps "sees activity in OTC swaps as a consistent and frequent market that
         operates independently from the listed derivatives markets, and has its own dedicated
         swaps brokers that supply a brokerage service to banks. This indicates that listed options
         and futures do not perform the same function as swaps for the banks, despite the greater
         concentration of liquidity in certain exchange products."404 BNPP stated that "swaps are
         only traded OTC: exchanges tried to introduce swaps (e.g Liffe tried to introduce a swap
         note in 2000) but without success. According to BNPP this is because swaps are tailored
         to particular dates and therefore they are not fungible by definition. As a result, they are
         not suited for exchanges".405
   (440) In addition, while cross-margining between futures and options is currently offered by all
         clearing-houses active in European derivatives, there is no clearing-house currently
         offering cross-margining between futures and options on the one hand and swaps on the
         other.
   (441) As concerns substitutability between futures and options, while they are both traded
         primarily on exchanges, they offer different payoffs and have different uses. LSE noted
         that "futures tended to be traded on screen (i.e. on exchange) whereas options were much
         more prearranged in part (but not only) to benefit from the fee cap. There was no
         equivalent OTC market for trading futures.406
   (442) While from the demand-side perspective, the demand to trade derivatives would seem
         specific to the specific type of contract and therefore options and futures would not seem
         substitutable, from the supply-side, exchanges are able, and typically do offer, both futures
         and options on underlyings on which they list contracts. Indeed, once an exchange has
         established liquidity in futures on an underlying, it can start offering options at minimum
         cost (or vice versa).
   (443) Therefore, it is concluded for the purpose of this Decision that swaps do not belong to
         the same product market as futures and options. The question as to whether futures and
   402
           As to the forwards being distinct to the futures please refer to Recitals (416) and (417) on ETD vs. OTC
   403
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with ICE of 14 September 2011, [...]* – paragraph 10.
   404
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with ICAP of 14 September 2011[...]*, paragraph 4. ICAP also
           stressed the fact that "OTC interest rate swaps are almost never traded for a period of less than two
           years and are often traded in five, seven, or ten year tenor, whereas ETDs are normally held for a
           shorter period of time", see ICAP's observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/
           NYSE Euronext submitted pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011,
           paragraph 6.13 [...]*.
   405
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with BNPP of 16 September 2011, [...]*, paragraph 19.
   406
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with LSE of 21 September 2011[...]*, paragraphs 22-23.
EN                                                        107                                                       EN

         options on a particular underlying belong to the same or separate relevant markets can
         be left open as the competitive assessment would remain the same irrespective of the
         conclusion on this point. This is because the notified transaction is likely to give rise to
         a significant impediment of effective competition with respect to a number of listed
         derivatives irrespective of whether options and futures were to be considered as
         separate relevant markets or part of the same market. As a result, the term ETDs used in
         this Decision generally refers to exchange-traded options and futures taken together.
                            11.1.1.2.2.4.     Conclusion
   (444) On the basis of the above, it is concluded for the purpose of this Decision that the
         market for trading and clearing of derivatives should generally be subdivided according
         to the execution environment into ETDs and OTC derivatives and the type of customer.
         Furthermore, the market should be subdivided according to the underlying asset class
         comprising the whole series of contracts within each asset class. Finally, the market
         should be subdivided according to the type of product into swaps, futures and options
         while the question of whether futures and options belong to the same relevant market
         can be left open.
   (445) As a result, the relevant markets in the area of derivatives trading and clearing on which
         the effects of the notified transaction are assessed in this Decision are the following:
             -   As concerns customers that can trade only ETDs, the relevant markets are the
                 market for existing and new exchange-traded European interest rate futures and
                 options possibly subdivided into STIR and LTIR, the market for existing and new
                 European single stock equity futures and options, and, the market for new
                 European equity index futures and options407;
             -   As concerns customers that trade both ETDs and OTC derivatives, the relevant
                 markets are the market for existing and new exchange-traded European interest
                 rate futures and options possibly subdivided into STIR and LTIR and possibly
                 comprising ETD lookalikes, the market for existing and new European single
                 stock equity futures and options possibly comprising ETD lookalikes, and, the
                 market for new European equity index futures and options408. Indeed, given the
                 small size of the ETD lookalikes segment, it can be left open for the purpose of
                 this Decision whether, for this category of customers, ETD lookalikes belong to
                 the same market as ETDs traded on the central order book as the competitive
                 assessment remains the same regardless of whether or not, for this category of
                 customers, ETD lookalikes were included into the relevant product market.
   (446) In addition, it is concluded that OTC platforms, inter-dealer brokers, broker-dealers and
         OTC price discovery platforms operate in a different space to exchanges and therefore
         cannot be considered as offering services which fall within any of the relevant markets
         defined above.
   407
           Given that equity index derivatives are protected by IP rights, Notifying Parties overalp only with
           respect to the market for new European equity index futures and options.
   408
           Given that equity index derivatives are protected by IP rights, Notifying Parties overalp only with
           respect to the market for new European equity index futures and options.
EN                                                     108                                                     EN

   11.1.1.2.3.       Geographic market definition
   (447) According to the Notice on market definition, "the geographic market comprises the area
         in which the undertakings concerned are involved in the supply and demand of products
         or services, in which the conditions of competition are homogeneous and which can be
         distinguished from neighbouring areas because the conditions of competition are
         appreciably different in those area."409
   (448) Despite indications that the geographic scope of the market for derivatives contracts in
         which the activities of the Notifying Parties overlap (namely European interest rate
         derivatives or European equity derivatives) may be regional due to a clear nexus these
         contracts present with Europe, the decision opening the proceedings left the precise
         geographic market definition open as the conclusion on that point did not affect the
         conclusion that the notified transaction raised serious doubts as to its compatibility with
         internal market.
   (449) The Notifying Parties in their response to the decision opening the proceedings state that
         the relevant geographic market is worldwide and should include "the entire universe" of
         exchanges.410
   (450) The SO, similarly to the decision opening the proceedings left the geographic market
         definition open.411 The Notifying Parties in their response to the SO reiterated their
         arguments in support of a global market definition stating that major competitors are
         active globally and that the market is analysed as global in their internal documents and
         that, arguably, the Commission and other regulators acknowledge a broader "global"
         market for derivatives trading.412
                             11.1.1.2.3.1.     General considerations
   (451) First, as concerns the Notifying Parties' claim that the major players are active globally, the
         Commission notes that distribution of market shares between the parties and their
         competitors may provide a broad indication of the scope of the geographic market.413 In
         this Decision, as concerns the underlyings subject to this Decision, the Notifying Parties
         are the only significant providers around the world. According to one of the Notifying
         Parties' customers, "there are limited number of contracts that exist on European
         underlyings on non–European exchanges."414 The Notifying Parties control almost all
         exchange-traded European interest rates (be they short term or long term) and the vast
         majority of exchange trading in European single equity and equity index derivatives, while
         the biggest exchange in the world, CME, controls the quasi totality of the US futures
         market. This market share asymmetry in various regions provides a first general indication
         that the scope of the geographic market for the products at stake may be narrower than
         global. This is consistent with the fact that historically, CME has been strong in the US
   409
          See Notice on the market definition, paragraph 8.
   410
          Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, paragraph 3 and
          section IV.
   411
          See SO, section 1.3.
   412
          Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraphs 23ff.
   413
          Notice on the market definition, paragraph 28.
   414
          [...]*, response to question 37 of Q8 - questionnaire to customers on derivatives, [...]*.
EN                                                       109                                                    EN

         while Eurex and Liffe have historically been strong in Europe and high barriers to entry
         have precluded the significant emergence of new players. This is illustrated by the
         attempts of Eurex US and Liffe US to penetrate the US market which have not met with
         significant success.415
   (452) While derivatives markets may be viewed as global in the sense that customers are located
         all around the world416 and in theory any exchange from another region can enter Europe
         provided it fulfils the relevant regulatory obligations, as concerns derivatives based on
         European underlyings as those subject to this Decision, there is very little trading outside
         Europe. This is because platforms outside of Europe have no meaningful margin pool in
         contracts based on European underlyings.
   (453) Trading of derivatives contracts that are by nature tied to a geographic region such as
         European interest rate derivatives or European equity derivatives is specific to the moment
         in time when the trading firm is willing to get exposure or reduce exposure to a certain
         risk. As a result, trading during trading hours of different regions would normally not be
         an alternative to trading during European trading hours. This is observable through the fact
         that liquidity in these instruments tends to be highest during European trading hours. This
         is because trading of these derivatives is used to hedge positions in underlying instruments
         which are themselves tied to a region and which appeal principally to local customers.417
         This was confirmed during the second phase market investigation which generally
         indicated that the choice of trading venue depends on trading hours as the liquidity in these
         region-linked instruments is highest during the trading hours of the region to which they
         are linked.418 This means that as concerns European IR derivatives and European single
         stock equity derivatives, a platform needs to operate during European trading hours. This
         has also been confirmed by the Notifying Parties at the Oral Hearing when, [discussion of
         STOXX licensing practice]*.419 […]*.
   (454) In order to build up presence on another continent than its home continent, an exchange
         must first build up physical presence in the form of a local infrastructure. This is because
         the location of the exchange has an impact on applicable regulations (including in case of
         default), post-trade arrangements, currency risk, trading hours (ability to offer trading and
         exchange support).420
   (455) The Notifying Parties argued that CME is penetrating the European market with its launch
         of Euribor contracts and that this evidences the global nature of competition.421 CME
         currently offers two products based on European underlyings – Sovereign Yield Spread
   415
           See Form CO, annex D.44.
   416
           Because a lot of trading goes through brokers, it is difficult to get a clear picture where end customers
           are located.
   417
           See [...]*, response to questions 29 and 35 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II,
           [...]*.
   418
           See replies to question 33 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – phase II.
   419
           The following question has been asked by a member of the case-team: [discussion of STOXX licensing
           practice]*, Oral Hearing, morning session 3:38:51.
   420
           See BNP Paribas, response to question 35 of Q8 - questionnaire to customers on derivatives - Phase II,
           [...]*: "The geographic location of the exchange platform has little influence. The law governing the
           contracts and the potential resolution in case of default are a much more important factor."
   421
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, paragraph 52.
EN                                                        110                                                        EN

         Future and Euribor which it launched in October 2011. [...]* 422 [...]*.423 As a result,
         trading of these products in US hours may not be an alternative for most European
         customers that trade the bulk of the liquidity on the Notifying Parties' derivatives trading
         platforms and in any event, given the high barriers to entry424 in this industry, it is unlikely
         that CME would develop substantial liquidity in these European products.
   (456) Finally, as concerns the Notifying Parties' claim that they analyse their performance
         against competitors worldwide, the Commission notes that this has little bearing on the
         reality that other platforms do not, or offer to a limited extent, contracts based on
         European underlyings. Therefore, with the exception of CME trading a limited amount
         of Euribor futures, the Notifying Parties in practice do not face competition from their
         "global competitors" in any of the products in which their activities overlap. Similarly,
         the statements in various regulatory proposals to which the Notifying Parties refer as
         evidencing the global nature of derivatives markets do not affect the fact that on the
         basis of individual products, the Notifying Parties are the only exchanges around the
         world that trade products in these categories.
                            11.1.1.2.3.2.       Exchange traded European interest rate options and futures
   (457) From the demand side perspective, customers of European exchange traded interest rate
         options and futures are located around the world. However, from the supply-side
         perspective only Eurex, Liffe, and to a very limited extent CME, offer derivatives
         contracts based on European interest rates.425 In addition, given the high barriers to entry
         into this market as described in Section 11.2.1.7 below, successful entry of other players
         into these products seems unlikely.
   (458) In any event, it can be left open for the purpose of this Decision whether the geographic
         scope of the market for exchange traded European interest rate options and futures is
         worldwide or limited to the EEA, as the notified transaction is likely to significantly
         impede effective competition under both alternative market definitions.
   422
           [...]*.
   423
           Agreed minutes of a meeting with CME of 1 September 2011, [...]*.
   424
           See section 11.2.1.7. of this Decision.
   425
           See Section 11.2.1.4.3.5.1 of this Decision for the analysis of CME's position in Euribor contracts.
EN                                                       111                                                    EN

                             11.1.1.2.3.3.      Exchange traded European single stock equity options and
                                  futures
   (459) From the demand side perspective, customers of European exchange traded interest rate
          options and futures are located around the world. However, from the supply-side
          perspective only Eurex, Liffe, and a number of other European exchanges offer derivatives
          contracts based on European single stocks. In addition, given the high barriers to entry into
          this market as described in Section 10.2.1.7 below, successful entry of other players into
          these products seems unlikely
   (460) In any event, it can be left open for the prupose of this Decision whether the geographic
           scope of the market for exchange traded European single stock equity options and
           futures is worldwide or limited to the EEA, as the notified transaction is likely to
          significantly impede effective competition under both alternative market definitions.
                             11.1.1.2.3.4.      Exchange traded European equity index options and futures
   (461) As in the case of single equity derivatives, from the demand side perspective, customers of
          European exchange traded interest rate options and futures are located around the world.
          However, from the supply-side perspective, only Eurex, Liffe, and a number of other
          European exchanges offer derivatives contracts based on European equity indices. In
          addition, given the high barriers to entry into this market as described in Section 11.2.1.7
          below, successful entry of other players in competition with the products currently
          offered by the Notifying Parties seems unlikely.
   (462) In any event, given that Notifying Parties compete only with respect to new products in the
          the market for exchange traded European equity index options and futures it can be left
          open for the purpose of this Decision whether the geographic scope of this market is
          worldwide or limited to the EEA, as the notified transaction is likely to significantly
           impede effective competition under both alternative market definitionswith respect to the
          innovation competition in this area.
       11.1.2. Off-order book services – registration, confirmation and CCP clearing of block
                 size ETD contracts
   (463) In the decision opening the proceedings, the Commission left open the question of whether
           off-order book and on-order book services constitute separate relevant markets.426 The SO
          concluded that off-order book services constitute a separate market from order book
          trading of ETDs.427
   (464) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties argued that off-order book services
           together with trade registration, confirmation and CCP clearing services for flex contracts
           belong to the same market as order book trading as they all use the same matching
           infrastructure.428
   426
            Decision opening the proceedings of 4 August 2011, paragraph 42.
   427
            See SO, paragraph 1.7.4.
   428
            Notifying Parties' response to the SO, paragraph 63.
EN                                                        112                                             EN

       11.1.2.1.PRODUCT MARKET DEFINITION
   (465) Off-order book facilities are services allowing parties to a derivatives contract bilaterally to
          negotiate the terms of a large size trade in an ETD contract available on the order book,
          and nevertheless still report and clear the trade on-exchange. This constitutes an alternative
          for such parties to simply submitting an order to the exchange's central order book, which
          would then electronically match it with another order based on pre-determined priority
          principles.429 The post-trading process is identical in both cases. Use of the off-order book
          facility therefore allows a trader to benefit from the three key post-trade advantages of
          trading in the exchange environment, namely fungibility, margin offset and elimination of
          counterparty risk, whilst ensuring full execution of the order at a predetermined price.
   (466) The exchange off-order book facility is reserved for trades above a certain size (the level of
          which is determined by the exchange depending on the contract in question). This level is
          determined on the basis of a trade-off between the desire to keep liquidity on the order
          book and the recognition that customers may be reluctant to execute trades above a certain
          size on the order book because of the risk of price impact or simply because there is
          insufficient liquidity available on the order book at an attractive bid-ask spread.
   (467) The off-order book facility therefore allows customers to trade exactly the same
          underlyings as those traded on the order book, with full offset and fungibility of positions.
          As a result it is a complementary service to on-order book trading, as explained by one
          respondent who stated that they "regard off-orderbook as a complement to trading on-
          orderbook"430. Market participants will take a view at the moment when they wish to trade
          on the terms available to execute a particular order on the order book compared to those
          which can be agreed bilaterally, and on the basis of this view will decide which route to
          follow. When negotiating the trade bilaterally, however, it is understood by both potential
          counterparties that exchange conditions will apply and that the trade will enter into the
          open interest and margin pool of the exchange, exactly as if it had been traded on the order
          book.
   (468) It follows that, given available liquidity at the moment of trading, and given exchange
          rules on minimum size, demand for off-order book services is distinct from demand for
          on-order book services. Whilst at the margins market participants may consider the two
          routes as alternatives (given the transactional costs of finding a counterparty away from
          the exchange), this is of no consequence for the competitive assessment since there is no
          "competition" between these two routes.
   (469) Both derivatives and cash exchanges generally offer off-order book services for some or all
          of the instruments listed on their platforms. Although such trades are agreed bilaterally and
          therefore, as regards their means of execution, might in one sense be viewed as OTC
          trades, the existence of full offset and fungibility and the elimination of counterparty risk
   429
            The term "off-book services" is sometimes used in the market (and by the Notifying Parties in their
            submissions) in a wider sense to cover all services of trade registration, confirmation and clearing
            regardless of the contract concerned, i.e. not limited to listed contracts available on the order book. In
            this Decision, the term "off-order book" is reserved for the case where trades take place in instruments
            which are available on the order book of the same exchange.
   430
            UBS, response to question 21 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
EN                                                        113                                                          EN

         distinguishes them from all other contracts traded OTC, since what is traded is in effect an
         ETD, differing only in respect of the mode of execution.
   (470) This view has been confirmed in the market investigation. One market participant noted
         that the "Main difference [with OTC] is the counterparty risk. Also Off order book is
         easier to trade and customer has exchange settlement price for their valuation" (that is
         to say it is easier to determine fair value of the resulting asset than in the case of an
         OTC contract)431. Another explained that "Off-order book exchange trading allows the
         trader to pre-arrange larger size trades in exchange listed contracts. Using the
         wholesale trade entry facility such trades can be agreed, ratified and effectively
         executed before being put onto the exchange. The most significant difference between
         this and OTC trading is that the exchange acts as CCP for off-order book exchange
         trading whereas OTC trades are bilaterally agreed."432
   (471) Indeed, according to the Notifying Parties, the distinction between on-book and off-book
         may sometimes be blurred. In this respect, the Notifying Parties note in the Form CO that
         […]*.433 […]*434. This is likely to be because the thinness of liquidity in these cases would
         expose the sell-side order to excessive adverse pricing risk in the absence of a known
         buyer at the offered price. Where there is a liquid order book in a given instrument,
         however, this risk would not be expected to arise.
   (472) The fee structure and actual fees for off-order book services and trading on the order book
         offered by the Notifying Parties are different. […]*.435
   (473) It follows that off-order book services provided by exchanges are different from on-order
         book services notwithstanding the fact that they concern the same contracts and use the
         same infrastructure. From a demand-side perspective, off-order book services clearly cater
         for specific needs that cannot in general be catered for at the same cost by order book
         trading. Indeed, off-order book services comprise the registration, confirmation and CCP
         clearing (including margin management throughout the lifetime of the contract) of block
         trades that could not be executed on order book without significant price impact, but do
         not include the trading service.
   (474) Because of the fundamental difference in use between off-order book and on order book
         facilities, customers would not switch between order book trading and off order book
         trading – and indeed cannot switch unless the size they wish to trade exceeds the
         thresholds established by the exchange. The mere fact that a separate service designed to
         cater for the demand of traders who want to trade large sizes without market impact exists,
         notwithstanding that this service might run the risk of subtracting liquidity from the order
         book, is an indication that there is no, or at best limited, demand substitutability between
         the two services.
   431
           BHF-BANK Aktiengesellschaft, response to question 26 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I,
           [...]*.
   432
           Principle Trading LLP, response to question 26 of Q1 – questionnaire to customers – Phase I, [...]*.
   433
           Form CO, Derivatives section, paragraph 6.289.
   434
           Form CO, Derivatives section, paragraph 6.289.
   435
           See Notifying Parties' replies to the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011. .[…]*. See also agreed
           minutes of call with [...]*.
EN                                                     114                                                      EN

   (475) As a result, it is concluded for the purpose of this Decision that off-order book services
          belong to a distinct, although closely linked market, to on-order book services. Because
          of the close link between the two services, which concern identical contracts, and the
          fact that only exchanges that list certain ETDs can offer off-order book facilities for
          these same contracts, the Notifying Parties' offering in respect of off-order book
          services overlap to the same extent as they do for on-order book services. Since the
          relevant off order book services concern the same ETDs as on-order book services,
          separate markets might similarly be identified for European interest rates, equity and
          equity indices derivatives as discussed for on-order book trading above. Since the
          service provided is essentially the same in all of these cases, however, the competitive
          assessment is discussed with reference to these asset classes as a whole.
       11.1.2.2.GEOGRAPHIC MARKET DEFINITION
   (476) Given the close link between on-order book and off-order book services, the analysis of
          the geographic scope of this market is the same as for on-order book services in all
           asset classes where the activities of the Notifying Parties overlap (see Section 10.1.1.2.3
           above).
       11.1.3. Trade registration, confirmation and central counterparty clearing services for
                 flexible versions of European equity futures and options traded OTC436
   (477) The Notifying Parties' activities also overlap with respect to trade registration,
          confirmation, central counterparty clearing and risk management ("post-trade services")
           for "flex" contracts. Flex contracts are single equity futures and options that could not be
           executed on exchange because certain of their economic parameters (such as strike date,
           strike price, settlement style and exercise style) deviate from those of the standard listed
           derivative available on the order book of the exchange in question.
   (478) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties argue that trade registration, confirmation
           and CCP clearing services for flex contracts together with off-order book services belong
           to the same market as order book trading as they all use the same matching
           infrastructure437.
       11.1.3.1.PRODUCT MARKET DEFINITION
   (479) Post-trade services for flex contracts are provided by NYX through a facility called Bclear
           introduced in 2005 and by DB through its Flexible Options and Futures Facility ("OTC
           Flex"). In relation to this type of contract, Bclear and OTC Flex offer the same type of
           services aimed at providing facilities for confirmation and clearing of flexible equity
           options and futures traded OTC. The rationale behind these services is to attract trades
          that would otherwise stay OTC into the exchange environment for clearing and post-trade
           services, allowing them to benefit from elimination of counterparty risk, and also from
           margin offset where relevant.
   (480) While Bclear offers these post-trade services for a wide range of options and futures on
           European equities (including single stocks and indices), as well as for commodity
   436
            See Section 11.1.3 of this Decision for definition of flex contracts.
   437
            Notifying Parties' response to the SO, paragraph 63.
EN                                                         115                                          EN

         derivatives, including for underlyings that are not listed on Liffe's central order book, DB's
         facility, by contrast, only offers OTC flexible options and futures on European equities
         (including single stocks and indices) which are also listed on Eurex's order book.
         Contracts cleared through these services represent significant parts of the cleared
         volumes and open interest of both of the Notifying Parties in the equity and equity
         index options and futures space.
   (481) The Notifying Parties claim that these post-trade services, despite being marketed as
         OTC clearing services, are simple off-order book facilities as they only make it possible
         to […]*438 Although the services provided are similar to those provided in the cases of
         off-order book services – namely, trade registration, confirmation, CCP clearing and
         counterparty risk management – and contract terms are defined by the exchange, they
         differ in respect of the possibility of netting, which is in general absent and in any case
         not immediately possible for flex trades. The market investigation provided indications
         that the services provided in relation to flexible contracts should for this reason
         (absence of netting) rather be characterised as OTC clearing services.
   (482) Indeed, several market participants indicated that they consider Bclear and OTC Flex as
         OTC clearing facilities: "[t]hese services were introduced approx. in 2007 to offer
         clearing on "look-alike" contracts (listed contracts with a customised maturity, strike
         price...)439. We trade on equity derivatives (single stocks and index). From our point of
         view, they are pure OTC clearing facilities and are presented as such by NYSE Liffe
         and Eurex;"440 "Substance of services: - Cleared service for equity derivatives (futures
         and options) on blue chip single stocks, national and pan-European indices - Register
         OTC business for trade confirmation, administration, and clearing as if it were an
         Exchange Contract - Retain flexibility to specify contract maturity, exercise price and
         settlement method - Allow for novation of contracts by CCP thus allowing a position to
         be opened and closed via different participants;"441 "FLEX is a OTC clearing
         facility;"442 [...]*443. "The exchanges with their single stock products (such as Bclear)
         function only as clearing agents"444.
   438
           Notifying Parties' response to Commission's RFI of 13 September 2011, page 6.
   439
           For the avoidance of doubt, it should be noted that "lookalike" here should not be confused with
           "lookalike" as defined in section 11.1.1.2.2.1.3 of this Decision, which is limited to exact copies of the
           economic exposure offered by an ETD. In general, there is certain fluidity in how market participants
           use some elements of terminology.
   440
           BNPP, response to question 23 of Q8 Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*, which
           also stated that "BClear and OTC Flex are services providing clearing of OTC contracts (off order book
           used to exist before and the only rationale of introducing these services was to provide a new service
           that did not exist). Through these services, contracts traded OTC are declared on the platforms. BClear
           accept vanilla contracts, standardised, regardless of being listed on Liffe, whilst OTC Flex accepts only
           contracts listed on Eurex and only single stock options, which are then cleared on Eurex. While BClear
           allows margin offset with Liffe's order book, Eurex only recently allowed partial offset", agreed minutes
           of conference call of 16 September 2011, [...]* Out of 42 respondents, 13 described them as clearing
           facilities (see non-confidential replies to questionnaire Q8). See also agreed minutes of telephone
           conference with BNPP of 16.9.2011, [...]*, para. 15.
   441
           [...]*, response to question 23 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*.
   442
           DZ Bank AG, response to question 23 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II,
           [...]*.
   443
           [...]*, response to question 23 of Q8 Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase II, [...]*. See
           also the replies to the same question of Banca Akros S.p.A., [...]*, FOA, [...]*, and Landesbank Berlin
           AG, [...]*. Nonetheless, see also the replies to the same question of [another customer]* ("For market
EN                                                        116                                                         EN

   (483) According to LSE, "the major innovation of BClear when it was introduced was that it
         allowed trade reporting and clearing in products which Liffe did not have on its order
         book. IT was accompanied by a major pricing innovation whereby the linear pricing in
         volume used on the order book was subject to a price cap. As block or flex trading is in
         large sizes by definition, this kept costs down and was the aspect of the service most
         welcomed by the market."445
   (484) The Notifying Parties claim that […]* 446 However, Bclear offers post-trade services for
         ETDs not listed on the central order book of NYSE Liffe and achieves, […]* trading
         volumes from providing these post-trade services for many OTC contracts based on
         underlyings where the primary liquidity in the corresponding ETDs is on Eurex (it can
         be surmised that some of this volume will relate to lookalikes). […]*.447
   (485) The mere fact that exchanges introduced this service to attract trades that would otherwise
         remain in the OTC environment indicates the existence of a separate demand for this type
         of service. Clearly, trades entered into these facilities lack (with the exception of
         lookalikes, which form an intermediate category) the level of standardisation in
         economic parameters that would make them eligible for order book trading. As a result,
         these services cannot be substitutable with either on order-book services or off-order
         book. This is because the contracts concerned by on and off order book services on the one
         hand and flex services on the other differ in one fundamental respect: the former apply to
         fully standardised contracts while the second apply to flexible contracts.
   (486) Although market participants may sometimes use the term "off-order book" facilities
         also to apply to trade registration and clearing of flexible equity futures and options as
         offered by the Notifying Parties, it is clear that, in doing so, they are using this term in a
         different and wider sense to the one defined above at in Section 11.1.2.
   (487) It is, however, not necessary to decide for the purpose of this Decision whether these
         services are best characterised as off-order book facilities or OTC clearing services as
         they clearly constitute a separate market from on-exchange trading of standard ETDs,
         whether on- or off-book, since, inter alia, they do not involve the trading of ETDs, and
         the positions entered into are not fungible, at least at the outset, with positions in
         standard ETDs.448
   (488) Since the relevant services, in terms of where the Notifying Parties presently overlap,
         concern European equities and equity indices, separate markets might be identified in
         these two cases. Since the service provided is essentially the same in both cases, and
           participants, to facilitate Central Clearing for OTC trades. For the Exchange, to capture more volume
           from OTC market into Central Clearing, volume they wouldn’t have gotten otherwise because of the
           size of the trades. The difference between Off order book and OTC clearing facilities is very thin",
           [...]*) and Liquid Capital Management LLP ("They are both off order book trading facilities and OTC
           clearing facilities e.g. fulfil both needs", [...]*), where the concerned services are presented as both off
           order book and OTC clearing facilities.
   444
           ICAP, response to question 16 of questionnaire Q8 - Questionnaire to customers on derivatives – Phase
           II [...]*.
   445
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with LSE of 21 September 2011, [...]*.
   446
           Notifying Parties' response to Commission's Request for information of 13 September 2011, page 1.
   447
           Notifying Parties' response to Commission's Request for information of 13 September 2011, page 8.
   448
           .[…]*
EN                                                           117                                                        EN

          since the Notifying Parties' offerings hardly overlap as regards indices, the competitive
          assessment is discussed with reference to flexible equity and equity index futures and
          options as a whole.
   (489) Therefore, it is concluded for the purpose of this Decision that trade registration,
          confirmation and central counterparty clearing services for flexible European equity
          futures and options traded OTC constitutes a distinct product market.
       11.1.3.2.GEOGRAPHIC MARKET DEFINITION
   (490) Given the close link between the services for trade registration, confirmation and central
          counterparty clearing services for flexible European equity futures and options traded
          OTC and off order book services in standardised ETDs, the analysis of the geographic
          scope of this market is the same as for both on- and off-order book services in all asset
          classes where the activities of the Notifying Parties overlap (see Sections 10.1.1.2.3 and
          11.1.2.2 above).
       11.2.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
   (491) The following Section 10.2.1 deals with the competitive assessment of all relevant
          markets related to trading and clearing of exchange traded derivatives. Sections 11.2.2
          and 11.2.3 deal with off-order book and flexible post-trade services respectively.
          Section 11.2.4 concludes for the competitive assessment of the relevant markets in the
          field of derivatives as a whole.
          11.2.1. Trading and clearing of exchange traded derivatives
       11.2.1.1.INTRODUCTION
   (492) This Section of the Decision is organised as follows. Section 11.2.1.2 outlines the
          general parameters of competition in the markets concerned by this Decision. Section
          11.2.1.3 then looks at the nature of competition between the Notifying Parties in
          general terms, and is followed by Sections on competition between the Notifying
          Parties in European interest rate futures and options (11.2.1.4), single stock equity
          options and futures (11.2.1.5) and equity indices (11.2.1.6). Sections on barriers to
          entry (11.2.1.7) and buyer power (11.2.1.8), which apply in respect of all product
          classes concerned, then follow.
   11.2.1.1.1.      The Commission's analytical framework
   (493) In making its competitive assessment of the markets concerned by this Decision, the
          Commission applies the Guidelines on the assessment of horizontal mergers under the
          Council Regulation on the control of concentrations between undertakings (the
          "Horizontal Merger Guidelines").449
   (494) According to the Horizontal Merger Guidelines, "a merger may significantly impede
          effective competition in a market by removing important competitive constraints on one
          or more sellers or service providers, who consequently have increased market power.
   449
            OJ C 31, 05.02.2004, p. 5.
EN                                                 118                                               EN

         The most direct effect of the merger will be the loss of competition between the merging
         firms. For example, if prior to the merger one of the merging firms had raised its
         prices, it would have lost some sales to the other merging firm. The merger removes
         this particular constraint."450 The Merger Regulation clarifies that all mergers giving
         rise to such non-coordinated effects must be declared incompatible with the internal
         market.451
   (495) Typically, in concentrated markets such as the derivatives markets concerned by this
         Decision, the most direct effect of the merger is the loss of competition between the
         merging parties. Similarly, a merger between potential competitors may significantly
         impede effective competition if the potential competitor in a market significantly
         constrains the behaviour of firms active in the market.452
   (496) The Commission has made its assessment in light of the following factors that are
         according to the Horizontal Merger Guidelines relevant for the competitive assessment
         in horizontal merger cases:
            (a)    as regards the likelihood of significant non coordinated effects:
                   - the market shares that would result from the notified transaction in all
                       relevant markets under all possible market definitionsthe closeness of
                       competition between NYX and DB; andthe ability of customers to switch
                       suppliers post-merger.
            (b)    as regards the assessment of countervailing effects, the Commission analysed:
                   - potential buyer power of the merged entity's customers; and
                   - the likelihood of timely and sufficient entry post-merger.
            (c) as regards the assessment of the effects of the merger on markets where DB
            and NYX are potential competitors, the Commission assessed the two cumulative
            conditions :
                   - the existence of the pre-merger constraining influence (or the ability to
                       grow into an effective competitive force) of the Party that is a potential
                       competitor in a market where the other Party is already present; and
                   - the existence (or not) of other potential competitors that would be able to
                       maintain sufficient competitive pressure on the merged entity post merger.
   (497) In this respect, it should be recalled that pursuant to paragraph 26 of the Horizontal
         Merger Guidelines, not all of the listed factors need to be present for a significant
         impediment to effective competition to arise.
   450
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 24.
   451
           Merger Regulation, Recital 25.
   452
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraphs 58 and 59.
EN                                                     119                                        EN

   11.2.1.1.2.       The overall market position of the Notifying Parties
   (498) The Notifying Parties are de facto the only two players offering exchange trading in
          European interest rate futures and options, and they occupy predominant positions in
          trading of European single equity derivatives (while being the only two players in their
          home markets) and European equity index derivatives. They together control over [90-
          100%]* of all derivatives based on European underlyings traded around the world. This
          is evidenced by the figures in Table 1 below which show the Notifying Parties'
          combined market shares in the two main product categories where they overlap, namely
          European interest rate derivatives and European single stock equity derivatives.453.
          Table 1: Combined market shares of the Notifying Parties for ETDs
         Type of ETD                         Combined market shares of the Notifying Parties: On-exchange
                                             only (on and off order book), year 2010
         European interest rate              [90-100%]* (NYSE: [40-50%]*; DB: [40-50%]*)
         derivatives
         European single stock equity        [80-90%]* (NYSE: [20-30%]*; DB: [60-70%]*) Significant overlaps
         derivatives                         in contracts on individual equities (Belgian, French, Austrian,
                                             Finnish, French, German, Italian, Portuguese, Swiss, UK)
         Source: based on 2010 figures provided in the Form CO, Annex D.15.
   (499) In existing products in European equity index futures and options, DB has a [90-100%]*
          market share for its Eurostoxx and DAX franchises, while NYX has a [90-100%]*
          market share for its CAC, BEL, AEX and PSI franchises and close to [90-100%]* for
          its FTSE index franchise.
       11.2.1.2.GENERAL PARAMETERS OF COMPETITION IN DERIVATIVES TRADING AND CLEARING
   11.2.1.2.1.       Introduction
   (500) This Section outlines the general parameters of competition in the derivatives markets
          concerned by this Decision. According to the Commission's market investigation in this
          Decision, exchanges compete on pricing and the cost of trading (Section 11.2.1.2.2), to
          attract liquidity (Section 11.2.1.2.3), technology (Section 11.2.1.2.4), product
          innovation (Section 11.2.1.2.5) and process and market design (Section 11.2.1.2.6).
   453
            The Notifying Parties' combined market shares under alternative market definitions are reported in
            section 11.2.1.4 of this Decision dealing with interest rate derivatives and in section 11.2.1.5 of this
            decision dealing with single stock equity derivatives.
EN                                                        120                                                        EN

   11.2.1.2.2.      Pricing and cost of trading of ETDs
   (501) The cost of carrying out a derivatives transaction comprises the following implicit and
         explicit elements: the bid-ask spread and market impact, the opportunity cost of posting
         collateral, membership fees as well as per transaction trading and clearing fees. The
         implicit cost of trading represented by the realised bid-ask spread is typically several
         times greater than the other costs traders incur.454
   (502) The market investigation confirmed that traders in general take into account the total
         cost of trading (including both implicit and explicit fees) when deciding where to
         trade.455 Derivatives exchanges compete on the explicit portion of costs (including
         rebates, market making incentives and collateral costs) to attract liquidity to their
         platform whilst implicit costs are mainly a function of the achieved bid-ask spread.
   (503) The Notifying Parties publish public fee schedules indicating headline fees for trading
         and post-trade services. However, headline fees rarely reflect the actual fees paid by
         customers as these are influenced to a large extent by rebate schemes, which, because
         they may be tailored to specific customers456 are difficult to analyse other than on a
         case-by-case basis. Rebate schemes are nonetheless an important way by which the
         Notifying Parties respond to competitive situations and try to attract most valuable
         customers. In this context, NYX states that […]*457 DB acknowledges that […]*,
         although states that […]*.458
   (504) It follows that the Notifying Parties' internal documents recognize that there are
         customers with different price sensitivities and […]*. This was also confirmed during
         the market investigation which indicated that the relative importance of explicit trading
         costs may differ according to the type of customer; liquidity providers tend to consider
         the level of trading fees as very important due to the high transaction volume they
         handle, while other customers indicated that the level of fees are not so important.
         Exchanges can and do exploit this different price sensitivity and compete for more price
         sensitive customers and those who bring liquidity to the exchange by granting them
         discounts.
   (505) The ability of the Notifying Parties to price discriminate between various types of
         customer is evidenced for instance by their applying different transaction fees to
         liquidity providers and to liquidity takers. Moreover, the Notifying Parties are able to
   454
           In the Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.181, the Notifying Parties state that the difference is "several
           orders of magnitude", a formulation also inadvertently taken over by the Commission in the SO.
           However, this appears to be an exaggeration. Indeed, as DB argues in a public document, "for many of
           the most liquid products (or so-called global benchmark products) at the globally leading derivatives
           exchanges, such as the Bund Future at Eurex, bid-ask spreads have been constantly close to their
           potential minimum level since the late 1990s", implying that, for these products at least, transaction
           costs are a more significant part of the overall cost of trading (see "The Global Derivatives Market: An
           Introduction: DB White Paper", op.cit., p.31.
   455
           See Recital (249) of this Decision.
   456
           Notifying Parties, response to question 13 of the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011.
   457
           NYX, response to question 15 of the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011.
   458
           DB, response to question 13 of the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011.
EN                                                       121                                                         EN

         apply different fees depending on whether the trade is executed on behalf of a client or
         for an exchange member's own account. For instance, in the case of Dutch Stock
         options on Liffe, a member would be charged a trading fee of Euro 0.15 per lot (with a
         maximum fee per order of Euro 80) if the execution is for its own account compared to
         Euro 0.75 per lot (with a maximum fee per order of Euro 160) if the trade is executed
         on behalf of a client.459 On Eurex, although order book per-contract fees are the same, a
         lower threshold for discounts typically applies when clients are trading options on own
         account than when they trade them for client account460. This practice concerning fees
         indicates that the different price elasticity of different types of clients – possibly caused
         by the lower ability of certain customers to switch to alternative solutions and substitute
         away from the exchange – can be exploited and captured by both of the Notifying
         Parties.
   (506) The ability to use its rebate policies to discriminate between customers with different
         price elasticities is recognised by NYX in an internal document discussing its pricing
         strategy. […]*:
                     §   […]* 461
   (507) Fee competition is the most common type of competition when exchanges try to attack
         an existing product. As a result, fee competition (including rebate schemes) between
         derivatives trading platforms is not limited to the Notifying Parties' platforms and
         products, but generally observed in the industry.
   (508) Thus, for example in relation to Italian single stock futures, which NYX offers both on
         its order book and through Bclear and where it currently faces competition from both
         Eurex and IDEM, it introduced fee caps for order book trading of these specific
         instruments citing […]* and considering that […]*.462
   (509) Similarly, in the US, Liffe and ELX have recently tried to challenge CME for its
         Eurodollar and US Treasury futures contracts, as a result of which CME lowered its
         fees.
   (510) In the same vein, Turquoise's attempt to challenge Liffe on FTSE Futures, though so far
         unsuccessful, sheds some light on the importance of fees.463 Although in this case,
         market participants confirm that Liffe did not respond with a fee reduction on order
         book,464 Citigroup draws attention to the fact that Liffe did respond by means of certain
         fee reductions and fee caps on FTSE futures trades transacted in block size on Bclear.465
   459
           On 24 October 2011, NYX made public an amendment to its fee schedules for Dutch stock options as
           of 1 December 2011, allegedly (according to submissions and comments made at the Oral Hearing) in
           response to .[…]*. This is discussed further in Section 11.2.1.5.3.3 below. See
           http://globalderivatives.nyx.com/sites/globalderivatives.nyx.com/files/an_11-023.pdf.
   460
           DB, response to the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011, Annex 1.
   461
           NYX Internal Document, "NYSE Liffe – Global Derivatives Strategy", June 2009, slide 14.
   462
           NYX Internal Document, Email of 3 August 2010 from […]* to ,[…]*, ENX-00260. London Notice
           3282 of 28 April 2010 applied these caps to order book trades and was followed by London Notice
           3290 of 1 June extending this to block trades.
           (http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/056/821/568213.pdf                                          and
           http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/057/695/576950.pdf, both viewed on 30 September 2011).
   463
           ICAP, response to question 51 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers, phase II [...]*.
   464
           See responses to question 71 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers, phase II.
   465
           See responses to question 71 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers, phase II [...]*.
EN                                                       122                                                 EN

         This is in line with the fee information provided by NYX itself.466 The fees in 2011
         were indeed reduced from […]* to […]*467, and caps introduced of […]*. This limited
         response is consistent with the perception by NYX that this threat had a low probability
         to succeed.468
   (511) It should be further noted that exchanges also have in their direct control the cost of
         clearing, both in terms of fees for clearing, as well as the cost of collateral (haircuts on
         interest provided on collateral posted in cash and safekeeping fees for securities).469 DB
         can also determine, and Liffe at least influence, the total volume of collateral posted via
         clearing policies on allowable margin offsets and contributions to default funds. The
         incentive to implement and maintain a collateral policy which provides as much scope
         as possible for margin offsets between correlated instruments, subject to appropriate
         risk management standards, is related, at least in part, to whatever competitive
         constraints the merged entity would face.
   (512) This last point is made clear in internal documents of DB relating to its new portfolio-
         wide margining approach, PRISMA. Thus, DB states […]*470; […]*.471
   (513) Price competition is also a key component of competition between the Notifying Parties
         in the services they offer for trade entry, registration and clearing of off order book and
         flexible options and futures, discussed in the following Sections 11.2.2 and 11.2.3.
   (514) It follows that, to attract or maintain liquidity on their platforms, derivatives exchanges
         compete on fees (including various rebate schemes granted to customers according to
         their price sensitivity) as concerns both existing and new derivatives products.
   11.2.1.2.3. Competition to attract liquidity and tendency of liquidity to aggregate
       on a single platform
   (515) Given the network nature of the industry, it is the very essence of an exchange's
         business to offer incentives in order to attract liquidity in particular contracts or types of
         contract onto their platforms. Indeed, liquidity is one of the main drivers of competition
         in the derivatives business.
   (516) In this respect, the Commission's market investigation showed that competition in
         markets which are characterised by closed vertical silos of the type operated by the
   466
           NYX reply to the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011, question 16.
   467
           The first of these prices is for client trades and the second for own account.
   468
           NYX Internal document, Memo with date April 14, 2011 to […]* from […]* with title Re: FTSE 100
           Index Futures - Turquoise response, Reference ENX - 00021 – 00001.
   469
           See responses to question 64 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers: "The possibility to post collateral in
           equities or bonds instead of cash collateral could play a role in the competition between exchanges."
           (Lyxor Asset Management); "If we have the choice between different platforms that offer the same
           clearing costs but different collateral conditions, we will choose the most flexible and less consuming in
           term of liquidity. Flexible means that our collateral can be covered with several assets: govies /
           corporate bonds / equities / cash" (Société Générale); "In [our] view, flexible usage of collateral and
           wide list of non-cash collaterals available are fundamental for an efficient usage of capital when
           trading on-exchange derivatives" [...]*.
   470
           DB internal document, .[…]*.
   471
           DB internal document, .[…]*.
EN                                                          123                                                       EN

         Notifying Parties is often, though not always, characterised by "winner-takes-all"
         dynamics whereby exchanges compete at the stage of introduction of new contracts in
         defining contract characteristics and fees to attract liquidity in the contract onto their
         platform. Once open interest has been built up at one trading venue, absent fungibility,472
         individual traders have an incentive to return to the same trading platform for trading in
         the same and similar category of contracts in order to be able to offset positions. Dealers
         also discount this expectation of future liquidity in their decisions to trade today, to avoid
         the risk of being caught with positions which are expensive to exit.
   (517) This tendency of liquidity to aggregate on one exchange was confirmed during the
         market investigation. For example, respondents during the first phase market
         investigation stated that "It seems impossible to create a credible competitor when the
         liquidity is concentrated on one exchange (Eurex Eurostoxx Futures competition
         history for example)"473 or that "Open interest is difficult to migrate once its (sic)
         embedded elsewhere".474
   (518) However, while for most ETDs, it has historically proven to be difficult in Europe to
         make the liquidity shift to any substantial extent to a different trading venue once
         liquidity has settled on the platform that "won" the battle,475 this does not mean that
         competition is over at that point of time and split liquidity is observed for a number of
         contracts. Indeed, the fact that liquidity has settled on one platform does not per se
         preclude competition between exchanges as is illustrated by a number of futures and
         options on European blue chip equities and options on Euribor short term interest rates
         which are traded by both Notifying Parties in competition with each other. Indeed, even
         in the instances where there are marked asymmetries in market shares between the
         Notifying Parties (one controlling the bulk of liquidity while the other having a less
         significant market share), this does not mean that the Notifying Parties do not exercise a
         significant competitive constraint on each other. Indeed, as detailed in the Section of
         this Decision dealing with potential competition, the mere threat that liquidity might
         shift, in whole or in part, to the other platform, is a credible constraint on the
         competitive behaviour of exchanges. In this context, exchanges keep each other on their
         toes constantly.
   (519) It follows that exchanges at all points of time (be it at the time of introduction of new
         contracts or when liquidity has settled on one platform) compete to attract liquidity on
         their platforms through a range of measures such as market maker incentives.
   11.2.1.2.4.      Technology
   (520) Exchanges equally compete in system performance and trading functionalities in order
         to provide additional incentives to customers to trade on their respective venues and
         additional ways to do so.
   472
           In fungible clearing regimes, as already indicated, significant shifting of liquidity and split liquidity
           appears to be possible and even commonplace.
   473
           Credit Agricole, response to question 51 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   474
           BGC, response to question 51 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   475
           The only example of large-scale shifting of liquidity has been the so-called "Battle of the Bund", further
           discussed below in relation to interest rate futures.
EN                                                         124                                                        EN

   (521) The Notifying Parties compete in technology with respect to trading and clearing
         services for their overlapping core asset classes, including in particular interest rate,
         equity and equity index derivatives.
   (522) The market investigation indicated that system performance (throughput and latency476)
         as well as the overall reliability of the system are crucial to attract new customers as
         well as keep existing customers. Notwithstanding that the Notifying Parties have argued
         that incentives to innovate in technology are exogenous, and as discussed further in
         Section 11.2.1.3.4.2 below, internal documents show that they well understand the
         importance of this parameter of competition. A recent example of this is constituted by
         […]*.477
   (523) Market participants generally indicated that exchange system performance is one of the
         factors they consider as very important in their selection of a trading venue and as such
         is a competitive parameter in the derivatives market.478. In this respect, one respondent
         qualified system performance as the "backbone of all transactions."479
   (524) The importance of technical performance of the trading infrastructure resides in the fact
         that any system failure or underperformance can be very costly for customers. System
         performance is of particular relevance to market makers who take on risk when placing
         their quotations on exchanges. As a result, "technology is a key tool in allowing market
         makers to reduce this exposure risk because better technology enables a market maker
         to adjust prices quickly in response to market dynamics. When market makers reduce
         their risks it means that they can offer more competitively priced quotations i.e. the
         lower the risk, the lower the spread, and therefore the lower the cost to other market
         participants."480 Therefore, in order to attract good market makers (and hence liquidity
         on their venues), exchanges have to be in a position to provide irreproachable system
         performance.
   (525) As a result, exchanges are constantly competing in improving their technical solutions
         so as to ensure as low operational risk as possible for their customers and to avoid the
         loss of liquidity to another platform. During the course of the market investigation, one
         respondent pointed out that "there is currently significant competition between
         exchanges to improve the technological features of their trading systems, primarily
         driven by the desire to prevent the loss of liquidity to another platform. Technological
         failures that cause a platform to fail can have severe effects on liquidity as customers
         will shift to better performing platforms."481
   476
           Latency, or time delay, is an expression of how much time it takes for a packet of data to get from one
           designated point to another, i.e., in the trading context, for an order to trade to be transmitted for
           execution to the exchange.
   477
           See NYX internal document, "Business Report to Members of the Liffe Board of 15 June 2009", with
           reference ENX – 00052 – 00001, at p. 2. See also, for example, the DB internal document provided in
           response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011 […]* "Need for low latency trading, high trading
           system performance/throughput to serve algorithmic trading".
   478
           See responses to question 49 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers.
   479
           WestLB's response to question 49 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   480
           Getco's response to question 49 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   481
           ICE, response to question 75 of Q3 - Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
EN                                                       125                                                       EN

   (526) Competition between the Notifying Parties in respect of technology is discussed in
         Section 11.2.1.3.3 below.
   11.2.1.2.5.       Product innovation
   (527) As a result of certain "winner-takes-all" dynamics, one of the most important forms of
         competition between derivatives exchanges occurs when exchanges try to come up with
         new contract ideas and attract new business.482 Attracting new liquidity and retaining
         existing liquidity in order to capture new sources of revenue and avoid the erosion of
         existing franchises is an important goal and driver of each exchange to constantly
         innovate.
   (528) As in any industry, product innovation therefore covers a range of initiatives from
         incremental improvements to completely new developments related in a more distant
         way to existing franchises. In this instance, three general categories can be recognised:
             •      Type I innovations relate to so-called "product upgrades", namely individual
                    ETDs, or a set of individual ETDs, where one exchange has an existing strong
                    franchise. Such innovation if carried out by the incumbent may pursue
                    revenue-enhancing goals and/or be defensive in purpose. If carried out by a
                    challenger it may attempt to get liquidity to switch or, more modestly, to
                    occupy a niche position.
             •      Type II innovations relate to so-called "product adjacencies", namely the
                    launch of new ETDs within a class where the incumbent has an existing
                    franchise, but where the contract itself is new (for instance based on a new
                    underlying of the same type, or on different contract terms). In this case,
                    innovation, if carried out by the incumbent, is likely to pursue revenue-
                    enhancing goals and again, if carried out by a challenger, it may attempt to get
                    liquidity to switch (hoping to offer a product which better suits the needs of the
                    market) or to occupy a niche position.
             •      Type III innovation involves the greenfield launch of unrelated new products,
                    where the exchange engaged in the innovation has no ETDs of this type or
                    adjacent to it. There may or may not already be exchanges with liquidity in the
                    contract type (if there is no exchange liquidity, it is likely that there is liquidity
                    in the OTC world).
   (529) Whilst the Notifying Parties compete with respect to product upgrades in product areas
         where they overlap (which they may attempt respectively to stimulate or forestall),
         competitive rivalry between the Notifying Parties in product innovation is focused on
         product adjacencies concerning products which are correlated to existing products (and
         therefore allow for margin offsets) and products which appeal to a similar set of users to
         existing products. Because Eurex and Liffe have similar margin pools, there is a
         considerable overlap in the space of product adjacencies for which they compete in
         terms of product innovation.
   482
           The market investigation confirmed that competition "for the market" is frequently of particular importance
           in derivatives. See responses to question 61 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers.
EN                                                         126                                                         EN

   (530) The Horizontal Merger Guidelines note that innovation is one of the benefits of
          effective competition to consumers.483 In this context, the Commission is required to
          assess whether a notified merger would be likely to deprive customers of the benefits of
          innovation by significantly increasing the market power of firms, resulting in less
          incentive to innovate. In principle, a merger may affect the incentive to innovate both of
          the merged entity relative to the Notifying Parties pre-merger, and also of third parties,
          leading in either case potentially to less overall innovation in the market.
   (531) Competition between the Notifying Parties in the area of new products, be they product
          upgrades or adjacencies, is discussed in the relevant Sections of this Decision dealing
          with products where the Notifying Parties are either actual or potential competitors.
   11.2.1.2.6.       Process and market design
   (532) Exchanges also compete on different aspects of market design and supporting systems,
          such as order types, connectivity and market rules, and there is ample evidence that this
          dimension of competition also characterizes the relationship between the Notifying
          Parties.
   (533) Clearing-houses and their exchange partners further compete in designing and
          innovating in the parameters of clearing, such as for instance the type of acceptable
          collateral.484
   (534) Competition between the Notifying Parties in respect of process and market design is
          discussed in Section 11.2.1.3.4.3 below.
       11.2.1.3.PRE-MERGER COMPETITION BETWEEN THE NOTIFYING PARTIES
   11.2.1.3.1.       Introduction
   (535) In order to analyse the impact of the notified transaction, the Commission sought to
          assess the extent of pre-merger competition between the Notifying Parties in light of the
          competition parameters and competitive forces prevailing in the derivatives markets
          concerned by this Decision.485
   (536) The Notifying Parties consistently downplayed the extent of their competition in the
          relevant derivatives markets claiming that competition in these markets occurs solely at
          the level of introduction of contracts. For instance, in their submission of 17 January
          2012,486 the Notifying Parties state that "competition for existing derivative products
          effectively took place when the new derivatives contracts were listed by DB, NYX, or a
   483
            Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 8.
   484
            NYX, in an internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011 entitled
            "Process and Operational Innovation" compares itself to Eurex and specifies that […]*.
   485
            In line with the market definition in this case and in light of the conclusion that ETDs and OTC
            derivatives belong to separate product markets with respect to all relevant product markets, the level of
            competitive constraint from OTC trading (be it out-of-market constraint) is not further analysed in this
            Decision.
   486
            Notifying Parties, Submission in support of merger clearance, 17 January 2012, page 7.
EN                                                       127                                                          EN

         third party exchange for the first time."487 The implication of this statement is that there
         can be or should be no further competition once liquidity has settled in a certain asset
         class. This is not the case. There is ample evidence in the present case that the fact that
         one exchange may have won an initial liquidity battle does not insulate that exchange
         from a competitive constraint subsequently, whether that constraint is actual or
         potential.
   (537) Indeed, and contrary to the Notifying Parties claims, the market investigation and the
         Commission's analysis of all the evidence have shown that competition between the
         Notifying Parties essentially takes three forms: actual competition in products where
         both Notifying Parties are active, potential competition in products where one of the
         Notifying Parties has the bulk of the liquidity while the other is a potential entrant and
         competition to introduce new or improved products to the market
   (538) While actual competition relates to existing overlaps between the Notifying Parties'
         product offerings within a given relevant market, as well as related competition in terms
         of trading technology and processes, potential competition concerns product areas
         where one party is active while the other is a potential competitor. The Horizontal
         Merger guidelines state that "Concentrations where an undertaking already active on a
         relevant market merges with a potential competitor in this market can have similar
         anti-competitive effects to mergers between two undertakings already active on the
         same relevant market and, thus, significantly impede effective competition." This
         applies when "the potential competitor significantly constrains the behaviour of the
         firms active in the market. This is the case if the potential competitor possesses assets
         that could easily be used to enter the market without incurring significant sunk costs."
         488
   (539) In this Decision, potential competition refers to the constraint that the Notifying Parties
         impose on each other within a given relevant market by virtue of the threat of entry into
         that market despite not being present in the market today. Potential competition has a
         significant constraining effect on the incumbent as the incumbent needs to avoid any
         substantial degradation of the terms of the incumbent product offering in terms, for
         instance, of price, product features and technology. Potential competition is also
         illustrated by a number of instances where there has been actual competition in the past,
         but such competition has by now resolved itself in favour of one or the other party,
         either entirely or in part. Indeed, the fact that there is a competitor which could step in if
         the incumbent makes a mistake puts competitive pressure on the incumbent in terms of
         fees, system performance and product portfolio. For established asset classes, such a
         threat is credible, however, only if the other competitor already has a margin pool of
   487
           This is in the context of the Parties seeking to justify the limitation of their proposed access
           commitment to new products only, but it is nevertheless instructive as regards the Parties' views on
           competition.
   488
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraphs 58 and 59 state that "Concentrations where an undertaking
           already active on a relevant market merges with a potential competitor in this market can have similar
           anti-competitive effects to mergers between two undertakings already active on the same relevant
           market and, thus, significantly impede effective competition." This applies when "the potential
           competitor significantly constrains the behaviour of the firms active in the market. This is the case if the
           potential competitor possesses assets that could easily be used to enter the market without incurring
           significant sunk costs."
EN                                                      128                                                             EN

         some correlated contracts, the required know-how and a similar membership base, as is
         the case for the Notifying Parties.
   (540) In addition, the fact that it might be difficult to attract liquidity from a platform once it
         has settled there does not mean that attempts to do so are illegitimate or without value.
         In this regard, the Notifying Parties highlighted as significant the fact that a number of
         examples of previous attempts at competition which have been cited all failed489. Even
         if this is the case, it does not mean that any such attempts were without value or
         competitive impact.490 In fact, quite the opposite is the case. As is demonstrated in the
         sections of this Decision dealing with potential competition in the relevant derivatives
         markets, it is precisely attempts such as these, whether they are ultimately successful or
         not, which act as an important competitive constraint. Indeed, even where competition
         eventually results in one platform becoming the preferred platform for trading a certain
         contract, this does not automatically imply that the acquired product franchise is
         incontestable and therefore that there is no further competitive constraint.
   (541) Competition to bring new or improved products to the market is driven in many cases
         by the expectation, or at least hope, that ultimately the successful innovator will capture
         all demand in the product in question. Indeed, the prospect of capturing all liquidity in a
         single product has historically characterised exchange markets (both cash and
         derivatives) and remains an important motivation to be first in bringing a successful
         new product to market, although as noted it does not apply universally and has indeed
         largely been superseded for trading in European blue chip cash stocks as a result of
         MiFID.
   (542) In the context of the analysis of actual and potential competition between the Notifying
         Parties, the Commission sought to assess to what extent there are other actual and
         potential competitors active in the markets concerned and the level of competitive
         pressure they could exert post-merger. According to settled case law, "the examination
         of conditions of competition must be based not only on existing competition between
         undertakings already present on the relevant market but also on potential competition,
         in order to ascertain whether, in the light of the structure of the market and the
         economic and legal context within which it functions, there are real concrete
         possibilities for the undertakings concerned to compete among themselves or for a new
         competitor to enter the relevant market and compete with established undertakings."491
   11.2.1.3.2. The Notifying Parties compete head-to-head and are each other's
       closest actual and potential competitors
   (543) The Notifying Parties compete head-to-head by offering trading services in products
         which offer identical economic exposure in both the interest rate and single equity
         derivatives markets concerned by this Decision.492 All parameters of competition
   489
           Notifying Parties, Submission in support of merger clearance, 17 January 2012 , pages 11-12.
   490
           In one sense, the Notifying Parties do acknowledge this when they seek to portray CME as Liffe's […]*
           competitor for Euribor, a contract initially introduced by Liffe..
   491
           See for instance Case T-177/04 easyJet v Commission [2006] ECR II-1913, paragraph 116. See also
           paragraph 60 of Horizontal Merger Guidelines.
   492
           In interest rate derivatives, the Notifying Parties compete not only in products which provide identical
           economic payoffs, but also in products with somewhat different payoffs where this difference is less
EN                                                         129                                                      EN

         discussed in Section 10.2.1.2 above are present when it comes to competition between
         the Notifying Parties' derivatives exchanges. Indeed, Eurex and Liffe compete fiercely
         to attract and maintain liquidity, especially in contracts based on European financial
         underlyings; they compete on fees, in technology and in product and market design.
         This is because, as shown in Table 1 above, the structure of European financial
         derivatives markets is essentially duopolistic in the sense that Eurex and Liffe are
         essentially the only players in European interest rate and single stock equity derivatives.
   (544) As concerns fees, while historical analysis of ETD fees shows that, for existing
         contracts, headline unit fees have in most cases remained stable with no material
         reductions over the past years493 indicating that once liquidity has settled, competition
         in fees seems to have been more limited,494 for contracts where directly comparable
         alternatives exist on other trading platforms, episodes of price competition are often
         observed between exchanges, including between the Notifying Parties, which then
         compete directly on fees for the trading of the specific contract. In this context,, the
         challenger prices at a considerable discount to the incumbent in order to try to
         overcome the latter's liquidity advantage, and is also in a position to do so because of
         the fact that he faces only fixed costs of entry. Similarly, the incumbent's ability to
         respond with aggressive price cuts itself is constrained, if at all, primarily by a concern
         to avoid undercutting its own future revenues once - hopefully - it has seen off the
         competitive threat.
   (545) Eurex and Liffe have highly overlapping membership bases which indicate that
         customers view them as alternative providers. According to the Commission's
         calculations based on information provided by the Notifying Parties, over […]% of
         contracts traded on Eurex and Liffe involve firms present on both platforms495. UBS
         stated that "In terms of closeness of competition, UBS Participants pointed to the very
         considerable membership overlap between the Parties and the role of the installed base
         of connectivity software which allowed traders to access both platforms as examples
         supporting why Liffe and Eurex are each other’s significant competitor."496
   (546) This Decision demonstrates that, regarding the relevant derivatives markets concerned
         by this Decision, the Notifying Parties are each other's closest competitors principally
         due to their overlapping membership base, comparable portfolio of contracts and the
         size of the margin pool. Eurex and Liffe together account for most derivatives contracts
         traded on European underlyings and have been historically competing to attract
         European business. This uniquely close competitive relationship prevailing between
           important than considerations of liquidity or where the related hedge serves some purposes better than
           others.
   493
           Based on fee schedules submitted by the Notifying Parties for the time period between 2005 – 2010, see
           also Responses by LSE to follow-up questions following meeting on 1 July 2011, [...]*.
   494
           In comparison, equity fees across Europe have fallen by c. 60% as a result of entry of MTFs. See Oxera's
           analysis in "Monitoring prices, costs and volumes of trading and post-trading services", May 2011.
   495
           For the purposes of this analysis, companies are aggregated according to the company group using data
           provided by the Notifying Parties in response to a request for information of 23 September 2011. Given
           that mother companies have control over the different subsidiaries trading at the different exchanges, it
           makes no sense to treat the different subsidiaries of for instance, JP Morgan, separately. It should be
           noted that these figures are a rough approximation and probably are a conservative estimation as all
           companies have not been able to be matched to the corresponding mother companies.
   496
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with UBS, 16 September 2011, paragraph 12, [...]*.
EN                                                        130                                                        EN

         Eurex and Liffe would be eliminated by the merger. Contrary to the Notifying Parties'
         claims, any competitive constraint on Eurex and Liffe other than that which the
         Notifying Parties represent, and ultimately any competitive constraint which would
         remain on the merged entity post-merger is, at best, of a limited nature.
   (547) The omnipresent competitive rivalry between Eurex and Liffe is evidenced by a number
         of the Notifying Parties' pre-merger internal documents. For instance, an NYX internal
         document states that "the two exchanges [are] locked in constant competition right
         across their businesses, including product development, technology, fees & incentive
         schemes and service value."497 Similarly, a memo to […]*, refers to Eurex as Liffe's
         "main European rival." 498
   (548) The Notifying Parties track each other's activities constantly and consistently, at a high
         level inside the respective companies. A very significant number of minutes of NYX's
         Executive Committee in the last few years provides evidence of the closeness with
         which NYX monitors Eurex, indeed having a section of the meeting routinely allocated
         to it (under the heading: "Eurex Initiatives Update")499. References to executive
         committee meetings dedicated to Eurex and its activities and the "competitive threat"
         are also found in other internal documents of NYX500. This level of interest is by no
         means comparable to the monitoring which the exchanges carry out with respect to any
         other exchange venues as regards their European businesses. Whilst from time to time,
         references to other platforms are made, such references are made less frequently and
         typically only with reference to a particular project (for instance to ICE in the context of
         CDS, which anyway falls outside the scope of this Decision)501.
   (549) It follows that, in particular as concerns European financial underlyings where they do
         not face a challenger, Eurex and Liffe are locked in unique competitive dynamics
         whereby they closely track each other's moves and which cannot be disturbed by any
         other player. This is also valid for products where Eurex and Liffe do not directly
         overlap but exert on each other a competitive constraint as potential competitors.
   497
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Minutes of
           Executive Committee Meeting 19.03.2007, Reference ENX-00812 -00001, subheading 07/56
           Euronext.liffe initiatives vs. Eurex. Although in the Oral Hearing the Notifying Parties suggested that
           the context of this quote was limited to the Notifying Parties' equity derivatives businesses, this is not
           apparent from the document itself.
   498
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, "Consolidation /
           Harmonization of European Derivatives Markets" dated 20/05/2009, Reference ENX-00471-00001.
   499
           See for example NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011,
           Minutes of Executive Committee meeting of 9.10.2006, Reference ENX-00766 -00002.
   500
           In the NYX Internal document, Minutes of Executive Committee of 14.12.2006 Reference: ENX-00770
           -00001 (NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011)
           reference is made to "[…]* provided an overview of Eurex, its approach to central markets and the
           wholesale / OTC market. […]* also provided a summary of areas where Eurex is expected to focus its
           competitive efforts in 2007. […]* requested an EC meeting in January be dedicated to the Eurex
           competitive threat".
   501
           Ultimately, as ICE states, "both Eurex and Liffe are European derivatives exchanges which
           predominantly trade financial derivatives which have a European geographic focus and competitor set
           – due to the intrinsically European scope of the underlying assets (European interest rates and
           European equities). They are each other's closest competitors. Indeed there are no other comparable
           exchanges. Between them they account for virtually all on exchange trading of European interest rate
           products and the vast majority of trading of European single stock and equity index products", response
           to question 43 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase II – [...]*.
EN                                                       131                                                          EN

         Indeed, the magnitude of the competitive harm resulting from the loss of potential
         competition in this case is a direct function of the closeness of competition observed
         between the Notifying Parties and the distance of all other competitors.
   (550) In this context, one respondent noted that "there are no other participants with anything
         like the existing customer distribution, […] which means that any new players would be
         playing catch-up for many years."502 Indeed, if there was general dissatisfaction with
         fees, system performance, product portfolio etc. of an incumbent, it is clearly
         conceivable that customers may consider moving all or part of liquidity to the other
         Party's platform.503
   (551) The result of this closeness of competition is that the Notifying Parties continue to act as
         a constraint on each other, even where all or almost all liquidity has settled on one or
         other platform, due to the fact that they are, in almost all cases, not only the closest but
         the only viable alternative platform to which liquidity could be switched. Potential
         competition therefore disciplines the Notifying Parties' pricing and service offering in
         the products concerned by this Decision due to the possibility of customers switching to
         the alternative platform of the other Party.
   (552) One respondent to the market investigation illustrated this disciplining effect as follows:
         "There is however the threat of competition as either firm [Eurex and Liffe] could
         currently credibly compete should one of the exchanges behave in a way (or fall behind
         in technology or service) that would incentivise the market to migrate to the other
         platform."504 Another market participant noted that "While Liffe and Eurex do not
         currently compete to a material extent, they act as a constraint on each other as
         potential competitors. The merger will eliminate potential competition between Liffe
         and Eurex."505
   (553) Even in instances where liquidity has predominantly settled on one platform, it does not
         mean that the market is not contestable. The Notifying Parties are well conscious of the
         fact that their respective franchises may be challenged by the other one, for instance
         through reduced fees. In this respect NYX notes in an internal document, comparing
         with the Battle of the Bund, that […]*506
   (554) Internal documents of the Notifying Parties show that threats to enter the other's markets
         are responded to based both on market intelligence prior to launch and on the
         conditions of launch itself. In many cases, the Notifying Parties already list products
         offering identical economic exposure and very similar characteristics which represent
         the closest alternative, even if the challenger has not achieved a significant market
   502
           ICAP, reply to question 31 of Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II, […]*.
   503
           For instance Nomura International plc., in its response to question 55 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers,
           indicated that "Since contracts are based on different underlyings, there is no competition between them.
           There is however the threat of competition as either firm could currently credibly compete should one of the
           exchanges behave in a way (or fall behind in technology or service) that would incentivise the market to
           migrate to the other platform" [...]*.
   504
           Nomura International, response to question 55 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   505
           Chi-X Europe, reply to question 46 of Q3 – Questionnaire to Competitors [...]*.
   506
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Memo to Executive
           Committee, From […]*, dated 20/09/2001.
EN                                                         132                                                          EN

         share. In such an instance, it is even easier to adapt commercial terms in an attempt to
         capture liquidity and the constraint from potential competition all the more effective.
   (555) In the following sections of this Decision, a number of important examples are given
         where the one of the Notifying Parties which had an incumbent position in a particular
         type of asset responded to the threat of entry by the other Notifying Party by fee cuts,
         incentives and other measures. This clearly indicates the importance of the constraining
         effect generated through potential competition and its impact on the overall level of
         prices charged for trading and clearing, especially in the area of interest rate derivatives.
   (556) In their response to the SO, and indeed consistently throughout the procedure, the
         Notifying Parties have claimed that, in interest rates, CME is their closest competitor
         for both the short and the long end of the interest rate curve. In respect of innovation in
         equity indices, they point to a variety of competitors, whereas they do not explicitly
         address the conclusion of closest competitor as regards single equity derivatives, at least
         in their core markets. Since the situation is rather different in each of these markets, the
         discussion of the points made by the Notifying Parties on potential competition and
         closeness of competition in their response to the SO is deferred to the relevant sections
         of this Decision dealing with individual product markets.
   (557) Table 2 provides a general overview of the players involved in derivatives based on
         European financial underlyings and key parameters of their product offerings. It
         outlines that the Notifying Parties share a range of characteristics for these key
         parameters that are unmatched by the other players:
EN                                                133                                                  EN

          Table 2: General overview of the players and main competitive parameters in
          derivatives based on European underlyings
         Company        Product             Significant         Sizable              Sizable             Margin offset
                        offerings           volumes             European             margin pool         possibilities
                                                                Membership           in European         between
                                                                base                 underlyings         European
                                                                                                         underlyings
                        IR     EI    SE     IR    EQ     SE
         DB             •      •     •      •     •      •      •                    •                   •
         NYX            •      •     •      •     •      •      •                    •                   •
         CME            •      X     X      X     X      X      X                    X                   X
         Turquoise X           •     X      X     X      X      X                    X                   X
         Nasdaq         •      •     •      X     X      X      X                    X                   •
         OMX
         TOM            X      X     •      X     X      X      X                    X                   X
         ELX            X      X     X      X     X      X      X                    X                   X
       Note: IR= Interest Rate Derivatives based on European underlyings, EI= Equity Index derivatives based on European
       underlyings, SE= Single Equity Derivatives based on European underlyings.
       Source: Compilation of data from various sources: Notifying Parties and relevant third party responses in market
       investigation.
   (558) Whether by virtue of actual or potential competition, the market investigation strongly
          qualified the Notifying Parties as each other's closest competitors507. Indeed, the
          majority of trading platforms considered that Liffe is the closest competitor to Eurex
          (BATS, BME, Chi-X Europe, Nasdaq OMX, TOM and Wiener Boerse), with only [one
          competitor]* of the view that this was CME. That Eurex is the closest competitor to
          Liffe was the opinion of all of these respondents (with TOM also putting itself forward
          together with Eurex in the Dutch, Belgian and French markets508)509. The reply of TMX
          also goes in this direction, whilst sometimes proposing also CME. Similarly, amongst
          customers, 34 respondents regard Liffe as Eurex's closest competitor with a further 10
   507
            Replies to questions 47, 48 and 49 of Q3 – Questionnaire to Competitors, [...]*.
   508
            NYX however mentions TOM in the context of trading in Amsterdam equity derivative products and
            OTC lookalike products and classifies this as a , […]*, "Risk report to the Liffe audit and risk
            committee, 15 April 2010", NYX internal document, ENX-00307-00001, p.12.
   509
            Tom has just initiated in these markets having launched its derivative service in July 2011.
EN                                                           134                                                         EN

         putting forward both Liffe and CME, whilst sometimes emphasizing that for European
         customers, Liffe was still the closer (one put forward Liffe and Nasdaq OMX). Only 5
         put forward CME alone, and 4 stated that there was no close competitor. As closest
         competitor to Liffe, 37 put forward Eurex, 8 Eurex together with CME (again
         sometimes commenting that in Europe Eurex was closer) and 3 no close competitor.
         CME alone was not mentioned at platform level, though for short term interest rates
         considered in isolation it was evoked by 10 respondents, though this still represents a
         clear minority510.
   (559) It follows that, as concerns derivatives based on European financial underlyings, Eurex
         and Liffe compete closely and exert significant competitive constraint on each other
         even for contracts where the bulk of the liquidity is with one of them. This constraint is
         all the more important in light of the duopolistic market structure of derivatives based
         on European underlyings and the particularly high barriers to entry characteristic of
         these markets.511 As a result, as is demonstrated in the sections of this Decision dealing
         with the relevant derivatives markets, Eurex and Liffe are each other's closest actual
         and potential competitors in these markets.
   11.2.1.3.3.      Competition between the Notifying Parties to introduce new products
   (560) In the decision opening the proceedings, the Commission outlined that the Notifying
         Parties, in particular as concerns the European financial derivatives, may be each other's
         closest competitors in respect of various types of innovation. The response of the
         Notifying Parties to the decision opening proceedings, and the further market
         investigation, nonetheless clarified that the scope of innovation within which the
         Notifying Parties primarily compete against each other rather than against other
         platforms is less extensive than initially considered in the decision opening proceedings
         and comprises product adjacencies and upgrades only, not unrelated product launches.
         This is reflected in a comment by ICE, which has indicated that the Notifying Parties
         "compete on innovation in product areas which are closely related to both of their
         activities as well as at technology level".512
   (561) The remainder of this Section therefore discusses product innovation in respect of
         product upgrades and product adjacencies only ("Type I" and "Type II" innovations).
         Competition in technology, process and market design is discussed in the next Section.
                            11.2.1.3.3.1.       Competition to introduce new products
   (562) New ETD contracts are constantly introduced on exchange platforms513 and range from
         adding new exercise and settlement dates for an existing contract series (a rather routine
         product upgrade) to launching a completely new suite of products, whether adjacent or
   510
           Replies to questions 56, 57 and 58 of Q1 – Questionnaire to Customers. The calculations are based on
           the non-confidential replies only.
   511
           See section 11.2.1.7 of this Decision for the analysis of barriers to entry.
   512
           Minutes of a teleconference call with ICE of 14 September 2011, paragraph 5 [...]*.
   513
           The importance of the introduction of new products in the derivatives space is also evidenced from the
           documents provided by the Notifying Parties, for example in a document of 2008 provided in response
           to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011 ([…]*). DB outlines that "Eurex launched nearly 200 new
           products and functionalities in 2007 and already more than 180 products and functionalities in 2008".
EN                                                        135                                                     EN

         unrelated, in response to significant changes in customer demand, market structures,
         market regulations, and macroeconomic changes.
   (563) The fact that product innovation is a significant dimension of competition between the
         Notifying Parties is attested by DB internal analysis taken from a recent DB strategy
         document: "[DB and NYX are] [m]ajor competitors on exchange level with similar
         business model, competition focuses on new products and services, less on existing
         benchmark products."514
   (564) The current economic context seems, if anything, to have made this aspect of
         competition between the Notifying Parties more important. DB states that: "The need
         for continued new product innovations around the core products is more urgent than
         ever given the opportunities to migrate OTC business to exchange and clearing
         platforms. […]*".515
   (565) The importance of the introduction of product upgrades and adjacencies has been made
         clear during the market investigation.
   (566) According to Nasdaq OMX, "Product innovation is an important competitive force in
         derivatives markets because derivatives exchanges may gain additional business …
         through the launch of new products appealing to their members. Competition between
         Eurex and Liffe to attract liquidity in newly launched products by either party is based
         primarily on fees, technology solutions, and margin efficiencies. Depending on the
         individual product there will be some sort of campaign to attract liquidity, most notably
         special rebates on trading fees."516
   (567) According to CME, "exchanges offer products that compete on product design, trading
         conventions such as tick size narrowing, changing of notional size (for instance make
         the contract bigger to appeal to institutional investors), technical parameters, type of
         collateral accepted, etc."517
   (568) There are numerous examples of past and recent competition between Liffe and Eurex
         to attract liquidity for new suites of products, such as the EuroBund contract, contracts
         on Eurozone equity indices (EUROSTOXX and EuroFirst) and contracts on Euro STIR.
         Each of these particular instances is reviewed below for the light which it sheds on
         potential competition. As a more general matter, however, competition in product
         innovation between the Notifying Parties can, of course, not be confined to instances
         observed in the past but equally concerns instances which would otherwise occur in the
         future and which, necessarily, cannot be predicted today.
   (569) During the initial market investigation, market participants confirmed the existence of a
         product innovation race between derivatives exchanges, and between Eurex and Liffe in
         particular. In this respect, one respondent indicated that "the exchanges engage in a
         continuous process of competing in innovation and attempt to improve existing
         products and offer new products to better serve their users and gain trading volumes.
   514
          See DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, […]*.
   515
          See DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011,: "[…]*
   516
          Reply to question 40 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, phase II [...]*.
   517
          Agreed minutes of a meeting with CME on 1 September 2011 – point 11 [...]*.
EN                                                    136                                              EN

         The merging parties are by far the two most active and relevant participants in this
         competitive process."518
   (570) Competition between exchanges to introduce new products is often prompted by
         regulatory or market changes bringing about new opportunities and creating demand for
         new derivatives contracts. In this respect, NYX noted in its internal documents that
         "History suggests that changes of market structure provide opportunities, and that
         political and regulatory pressure can be significant in determining the outcome."519
         UBS states in the context of the G20 reforms520 that "we would expect Deutsche Boerse
         and NYSE Euronext to be key competitive innovators on the market landscape for this
         new business"521.
   (571) Whilst there are therefore many intrinsic reasons why exchanges innovate, the tendency
         of liquidity in a particular contract to aggregate on a single trading venue, discussed in
         Section 11.2.1.2.3 above, creates a strong incentive to be first to the market or to come
         to the market with clearly a superior product for a given purpose.
   (572) Table 2 above illustrates that Eurex and Liffe are de facto the only exchanges offering
         ETDs in European equity and interest rates (outside certain national equity markets)
         and by extension are also best placed to compete for liquidity in new contracts of these
         types when they are introduced given the cross margining opportunities arising from the
         risk correlation between the same product types (see also Section 11.2.1.7.1.2)522. As a
         result, they are each other's closest potential competitor in this area of contracts when it
         comes to the introduction of new ETDs of the type in question.
                             11.2.1.3.3.2.     Pricing behaviour in relation to new product launches
   (573) As concerns transaction fees and rebates, competition is particularly in evidence when
         the Notifying Parties compete to attract liquidity in new contracts or in those instances
         when contracts providing the same economic exposure are available on competing
         platforms, notwithstanding the general tendency, absent fungible clearing, for it to
         aggregate on one or the other.
   (574) At the stage of the introduction of a new contract, in order to attract customers and
         hence liquidity on their platforms, the Notifying Parties carefully design their per-
         transaction trading and clearing fee structure by benchmarking themselves to their
         competitors, which in practice, at least for the asset classes where they overlap,
         primarily means the other Party. Thus NYX states that: "For new contracts, fee levels
         are proposed by the responsible product development teams having gathered relevant
   518
           See ICAP's response to question 48 of Q 1- Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   519
           See NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Project
           Blackhawk – Fixed Income derivatives, p.3.
   520
           For more on the Commission G-20 driven reforms, see Section 11.2.3.2.4 of Decision.
   521
           Reply to question 75 of Q 1- Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   522
           In this regard the relevant counterfactual is the best risk margining model which the merged entity
           could introduce; existing observed offsets do not always reflect the "best" that the exchange could do in
           order to render a new product more attractive.
EN                                                       137                                                         EN

         market intelligence and taking into consideration the prices of comparable and
         competing products".523
   (575) Equally, when a particularly immediate competitive threat arises, they tend to respond
         rapidly. For instance, at the time of the EuroBund battle, one Liffe board member
         pointed out[…]*524[…]*525
   (576) The role of pricing at the stage of introduction of a new contract can also be understood
         from an internal analysis made by NYX reflecting a few years later on the EuroBund
         battle: […]*526
   (577) The Commission therefore considers that customers view that the Notifying Parties
         compete on pricing to attract new business. For instance, one respondent indicated that
         the Notifying Parties provide "aggressive pricing and marketing to win new customers.
         A merger of the two would potentially reduce the need for aggressive pricing."527
         Another respondent stated that: "They both try to react quite quickly to each other´s
         new move, trying to offset the impact on the new launching price wise; a good example
         has been the listing of the universal stock futures in both exchanges"528.
                               11.2.1.3.3.3.      Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO
   (578) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties dispute the findings of the
         Commission on new products and product innovation,529 offering four main arguments,
         namely:
   (579) The Notifying Parties first argue that for interest rates, CME is at least as great a
         constraint on them for product innovation as they are on each other530. In the context of
         equity index products, the Notifying Parties claim that the constraint is formed by third
         party venues to which users could, if they wished, direct flows.531
   (580) The Notifying Parties also argue that except for a "broad claim" that “given the cross
         margining opportunities” arising from the risk correlation between the same product
         types, the SO does not put forward any evidence for the "assumption" that the Notifying
         Parties are each others' closest competitors in respect of product innovation532.
   523
           NYX reply to question 15 of the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011.
   524
           Deutsche Terminboerse, the forerunner of Eurex.
   525
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Memorandum,
           Bund team & Management Committee, 6 August 1997.
   526
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Memo to Executive
           Committee, From ,[…]*, dated 20 September 2001.
   527
           [...]*, response to question 60 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   528
           [...]*, response to question 60 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   529
           The Notifying Parties' arguments as regards actual and potential competition are dealt with in the
           respective sections relating to specific product markets below.
   530
           Notifying Parties response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 172.
   531
           Notifying Parties response to the SO, Equity Index derivatives, paragraphs 23ff.
   532
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 174.
EN                                                         138                                                  EN

   (581) The Notifying Parties argue that innovation takes place in the OTC space, not on
         exchange533 (although this claim is made in the context of the reply on equity index
         products, it seems to be intended to be of wider application).
   (582) The Notifying Parties argue that "head-to-head competition between the Parties in
         launching new products is not a significant dynamic in the derivatives industry". This
         latter claim is based on the assertion that "the SO does not identify a single successful
         product innovation since 2000 that either one of the Parties has won". 534
   (583) The Notifying Parties also contest the relevance of the various individual examples of
         innovation contained in the SO. In respect of index products they make the additional
         argument that innovation takes place at the level of the index provider, not the
         exchange.535
   (584) The Notifying Parties' arguments in respect of these individual examples and their
         claims regarding innovation in equity index derivatives are addressed in the respective
         Sections below.
   (585) It should also be noted that the Notifying Parties devote a part of their response to the
         SO seeking to rebut closeness of competition in respect of entirely new and unrelated
         products (Type III innovation). Since the Commission had already specified in the SO
         that concerns did not arise in respect of this type of product innovation, it is
         unnecessary to analyse the arguments of the Notifying Parties further on this point.
                            11.2.1.3.3.4.      Analysis of the Notifying Parties' claims in response to the
                                 SO
   (586) The Notifying Parties' first claim, that the CME is at least as important a constraint for
         product innovation in interest rates, as well as their second claim in relation to
         closeness of competition, can largely be dismissed on the same grounds as those which
         establish that the CME does not constitute an equivalent constraint in terms of potential
         competition and the Notifying Parties are each other's closest potential competitors.
         Indeed, the reasons why a new and different product might be a success have much in
         common with those which explain the relevance of a more direct competitive challenge
         with a product which offers similar or identical economic payoff. Admittedly, the lack
         of an established liquidity pool in the former instance means that barriers to entry are
         lower. All the other factors which distinguish the Notifying Parties' competitive
         relationship to each other from their competitive relationship to CME nonetheless still
         apply, namely the scope for margin offset and membership considerations. Insofar as
         product innovation serves a defensive purpose in relation to the threat of actual and
         potential competition, it directly follows from the conclusions on potential competition
         that CME does not constrain the Notifying Parties to the same extent as they constrain
         each other.
   533
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Equity Index derivatives, paragraphs 23 et seq.
   534
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 169.
   535
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Equity Index derivatives, paragraph 15.
EN                                                        139                                               EN

   (587) Positive reasons why the CME should be so considered are not advanced by the
         Notifying Parties. There do not appear to be any examples at all of the CME actually
         having successfully launched an innovative product in Europe adjacent to one of the
         products of the Notifying Parties. The example of the failure of CME's European
         Sovereign Yield Spread Future product (see footnote 422 above) is telling in this
         regard.
   (588) It follows that these claims by the Notifying Parties must be rejected.
   (589) In relation to the claim that innovation occurs in the OTC space before products are
         brought on exchange, and that this innovation will continue, the Notifying Parties
         rightly observe that the SO recognised the role of the OTC space in "incubating" new
         product concepts. However, it does not follow from this that such products make their
         way onto exchanges in a timely, much less automatic, fashion or that they do so under
         conditions which provide to customers the optimal benefit from competition.
   (590) In order to standardize OTC products and make them suitable for exchange trading,
         significant investments are required, both at the development stage and, once a product
         is launched, in terms of incentives to liquidity providers to trade the product in order to
         overcome the adoption externalities, namely the fact that, in initially thin markets, the
         natural incentive to trade is lower.
   (591) The costs of new product introduction are clearly set out by the Notifying Parties
         themselves in Annexes D.9 and D.10 to the Form CO. Even though the Notifying
         Parties concede that these estimates may be imperfect as some costs are not tracked
         systematically536, the information is nonetheless telling.
   (592) NYX identifies three approximate cost categories for new product introductions, "low"
         (of the order of […]*), "medium" ([…]*) and "high" (in excess of […]*). It should be
         noted, moreover, that these investments are anything but risk-free, and, in general, the
         higher the spend, the more innovative the product and also the greater the risk that this
         product will not achieve volumes which offset the initial investment. In one of the
         apparently most extreme examples, trade entry and clearing through Bclear of
         commodity products was introduced in March 2009 at a cost of around […]*, but until
         the end of 2010 had achieved […]*. It therefore goes without saying that the incentive
         to make investments in innovation of this order of magnitude may be affected by the
         notified transaction, precisely as the Commission has outlined.
   (593) In other examples, short and medium gilt futures were introduced in November 2009 at
         a cost which was "high". The competitive context of this introduction vis-a-vis Eurex is
         described in Section 11.2.1.4.3.3 below. The introduction appears to have been quite
         successful. Multi-Serial options on Euribor, which were introduced at "medium" cost in
         early 2010, have also been very successful537.
   (594) As regards Eurex, little information has been provided at the individual contract level,
         but DB has estimated total yearly spend on product innovation at between Euro […]*
   536
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraphs 8.80-8.84.
   537
           See      Euronext      press     release      of    29     March      2010,     available at
           http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/056/165/561654.pdf, viewed on 30 November 2011.
EN                                                     140                                              EN

         and […]* for each of the three years 2008-2010, up on an estimate of Euro […]* for the
         two previous years.
   (595) It follows that the fact of a product having been incubated in the OTC space is in no
         way determinative for that product's being launched on exchange, or for the timing,
         form and commercial conditions of such launch. This claim of the Notifying Parties
         must therefore also be rejected.
   (596) Regarding the final claim, according to which there have been no "important" examples
         of products launched in competition between the Notifying Parties since 2000, and that
         therefore product innovation is a relatively unimportant dynamic, this claim cannot be
         reconciled with the evidence on file, whether from internal documents and public
         statements of the Notifying Parties or from responses to the market investigation.
   (597) In this regard, NYX claims that "NYSE Euronext operates the world’s leading and most
         liquid exchange group, and seeks to provide the highest levels of quality, customer
         choice and innovation."538 Eurex even has a special website devoted to innovation,
         innovate.eurexchange.com.
   (598) Indeed, Eurex articulates what seem to be very similar conclusions to those of the
         Commission when it states, in April 2008, that "Product innovation and introduction is
         thus significantly more costly on-exchange [than OTC], and exchanges have to be more
         selective in product development. Nevertheless, derivatives exchanges are highly
         innovative. Globally, the top three derivatives exchanges (Eurex, CME and
         Euronext.Liffe) have introduced more than 800 new products since the beginning of
         2005, increasing the number of total products available to users by more than 80
         percent."539
   (599) High level innovations which date from later than 2000 include, for example, the launch
         of the FTSE EuroFirst index suite; EuroMTS Bond Index Futures and Euro-BTP
         Futures; Bclear and flexible options and futures; volatility and dividend futures, mid-
         curve options on Euribor, extensions of single stock derivatives into new geographies,
         and the Swapnote contract on Liffe, along with numerous more "incremental" but still
         significant innovations. Many of these are discussed below.
   (600) The final claim of the Notifying Parties in this regard must therefore also be rejected.
                           11.2.1.3.3.5.     General conclusions on competition in new products
   (601) On the basis of the evidence on the file, the Commission therefore concludes that the
         Notifying Parties compete at the level of introduction of new and improved contracts
         around their overlapping core franchises and are each other's closest competitors in this
         regard. The degree of closeness of competition may to some extent differ by asset class,
         as further discussed the Section dealing with relevant product markets below. As argued
   538
           See NYX press release, available at http://globalderivatives.nyx.com/nyse-liffe-us/press-releases/2008-
           09-03, viewed on 1 December 2011.
   539
           The Global Derivatives Market – An Introduction, White Paper of Deutsche Boerse Group, p.27,
           http://www.eurexchange.com/download/documents/publications/global_derivatives_market.pdf.
EN                                                      141                                                        EN

         by the Notifying Parties in their reply to the decision opening proceedings, there are
         indeed certain innovations, in particular product upgrades, for which one of the
         Notifying Parties is better placed than the other. However, even in this case, the
         incentive to innovate is at least in part driven by the threat of actual or potential
         competition.
   (602) In respect of product innovation in European interest rate derivatives and European
         single equity and equity index derivatives, individually the Notifying Parties are always
         much better placed than any other competitor to engage in similar innovation and
         therefore represent the closest competitive threat to the success of a new product and an
         important force behind the need to continually invest in product upgrades.
   (603) Even in the event that, post-merger, a certain innovation might reach the market in an
         equally timely fashion and in a form equally suited to customer needs, the notified
         transaction would still, as in many cases observed in the past, result in less price
         competition during the period of establishment of liquidity (as well as the loss of a
         pricing constraint from potential competition subsequently).
   11.2.1.3.4. Competition between the Notifying Parties in technology, process and
       market design
                           11.2.1.3.4.1.     Introduction
   (604) The Commission's investigation has also shown that the competitive rivalry between the
         Notifying Parties in each of the relevant derivatives product markets and in product
         innovation is similarly reflected in rivalry at an upstream level between them in
         technology, processes and market design.
                           11.2.1.3.4.2.     Competition in technology
   (605) The strength of the actual and potential constraint of each of the Notifying Parties on the
         other is a function of a number of factors including established margin pools and
         overlapping memberships. Amongst these factors is technology. The Commission's
         examination of the case has clearly shown that the Notifying Parties invest in
         technology at least in part in order to keep ahead of the other and forestall the risk of
         liquidity moving to the other Notifying Party's platform, as well as to be better placed to
         launch innovative products.
   (606) The Notifying Parties discuss at length in their strategy documents the importance of
         providing fast and reliable service offerings, where IT plays an important role: […]*540.
         Indeed, DB stated as much at the Oral Hearing, noting that there was always the
         possibility of a "disruptive change in technology" and that for this reason they needed
         to be on their guard.
   540
           DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011 […]*.
EN                                                    142                                            EN

   (607) Further, the Notifying Parties closely monitor each other's developments in this respect:
         […]*.541 IT plays a crucial role in all relevant markets and throughout the value chain,
         encompassing trading, trade registration and clearing as well as associated services.
   (608) Another respondent also confirmed that technological solutions and system performance
         are crucial for exchanges to remain in the market: "Similarly Eurex and Liffe are also
         competing in terms of technology innovation. System performance is a key criteria for
         trading and it a key factor that can trigger a shift of liquidity from one venue to
         another."542 One competitor noted that "the actual and, in particular, potential
         competition between Eurex and Liffe acts as a significant incentive on both exchanges
         to improve technology. The merger would eliminate this potential competition".543
   (609) These findings are echoed by a range of other respondents. For example, BGC states:
         "Both exchanges have competed on their respective trading systems since Liffe moved
         from open outcry. Liffe's system were seen as more versatile on spreads and options but
         suffered from an overall stability perspective whereas Eurex were known for stability
         but did not have the same option and spreads capability, although in 2010 they
         addressed these issues." 544
   (610) Dekabank states that "Technical equipment (availability, stability, speed) plays a
         considerable role for competition between the two platforms. Eurex occupies the
         leading position."545
   (611) Kas bank states: "The exchanges compete on several parameters: Connectivity type and
         technology requirements: flexibility in technology used to connect to the exchange
         allows members to fit the infrastructure to into the capabilities of the organization. For
         instance, Eurex requires MISS technology to be implemented in order to access back-
         office functionalities, whereas Liffe adopts no client-server architecture to establish a
         connection. Latency: Both exchanges offer low-latency high-frequency solutions in a
         proximity hosting environment, but performance may vary. Reliability: the market
         engines of both exchanges may suffer failures though the Eurex engine seems more
         robust as these failures are far more infrequent. … Service: technical support quality
         may differ or incur additional costs"546.
   (612) [One customer]* states: "Liffe and Eurex compete on: latency (speed of execution and
         message traffic, availability of co-locations), capacity (ability to handle enough data
         traffic in normal as well as peak markets, without throttling [i.e.] queueing of
         messages], reliability (quality of infrastructure, preventing outages or calculation
   541
           The DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, […]*. A
           similar comparative analysis is made of Eurex by NYX in the document Overview of Eurex Release 8.0
           of the Values API - technology partnerships, Doc. Nr. ENX-00758 -00001.
   542
           BNP Paribas Arbitrage, response to question 55 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   543
           Chi-X Europe, response to question 76 of Q3 - Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   544
           References in this and the following paragraphs are to replies to question 58 of Q8 – Questionnaire to
           customers, phase II [...]*.
   545
           Original: "Die technische Ausstattung (Verfügbarkeit, Stabilität, Schnelligkeit) spielt eine erhebliche
           Rolle für den Wettbwerb zwischen den beiden Plattformen. Die Eurex besetzt dabei eine Vorrangrolle"
           [...]*.
   546
           Kas Bank, response to question 58 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, phase II, [...]*.
EN                                                       143                                                       EN

         errors, maximizing the amount of uptime). Liffe and Eurex definitely try to compete on
         both of them with Eurex taking the lead in terms of performance and stability. "547
   (613) The Kyte Group states: "Most of our clients will be sensitive to 'round trip times'; the
         time it takes for an order to leave the originators computer, to be processed by the
         exchange and then to return to the originator with a confirmation of execution. These
         times are measured in milliseconds and the exchanges are in a constant fight to
         increase bandwidth, maintain stability and reduce round trip times. Historically, Eurex
         has been more successful in this "arms race". Both exchanges publish data relating to
         round trip times, bandwidth utilisation, orders-per-second processing capacity, etc." 548
   (614) A different view is expressed by only a small minority of customers, including DZ Bank
         which considers that "As product scope is overlapping only to a small extent,
         competition in technology is relatively small at the moment". Exane also considers that
         there is no competition in technology549.
   (615) This notwithstanding, a clear majority of customers expect the merger to result in at
         least a degree of reduction in innovation in both products and technology, with
         estimates varying according to the source. This includes the industry association
         AFME, which states that "the combined entity would have less incentive to innovate
         than it does currently through the removal of each exchange's main competitor"550. A
         minority expect the same (6 including FOA) or more innovation (5).
   (616) The market investigation has also outlined that exchanges, including Eurex and Liffe,
         compete not only to design and achieve liquidity in new listed contracts, but also to
         register and clear trades which take place OTC, therefore including the markets dealt
         with in Sections 11.2.2 (Off-order book services – registration, confirmation and CCP
         clearing of block size ETD contracts) and 11.2.3 (Trade registration, confirmation and
         central counterparty clearing services for flexible versions of European equity futures
         and options traded OTC). Competition in these areas is anticipated to gain further in
         importance under current regulatory initiatives in the Union (see Section 11.2.3.2.4
         below).
   (617) In this regard, [one customer]* states: "Going forward technological access to clearing
         facilities owned by the exchanges will become a more significant factor as more non-
         Equity OTC products are required to be cleared via a CCP. Healthy competition in this
         area will be welcomed."551
   (618) AFME places this in the regulatory context in the following way: "as regards
         technological innovation, experience has shown that this is pushed only by competition
         or regulation and would only take place much more slowly otherwise. This is evidenced
         by the developments in the cash equity markets post-MiFID where technology which
   547
           [...]*, response to question 58 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, phase II, [...]*.
   548
           Kyte Group, response to question 58 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, phase II, [...]*.
   549
           Exane, response to question 58 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, phase II, [...]*.
   550
           AFME, response to question 83 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase II [...]*.
   551
           [...]*, response to question 58 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, phase II [...]*.
EN                                                       144                                         EN

         had long been outdated was only upgraded by incumbents in response to the entry or
         threat of entry of the MTFs."552
   (619) The potential negative impact of elimination of competition between Eurex and Liffe on
         technology was also recognised by Liffe's Hugh Freedberg in his open letter to
         Financial Times at the time of DB's bid for Euronext in 2006, which stated: "We and
         our customers believe that the existence of two major European derivatives exchanges
         maintains an incentive for each to innovate in product development, technology and
         service quality that would be lost through a merger that would create a monopoly
         controlling more than 90 per cent of the European on-exchange derivatives market."553
                            11.2.1.3.4.3.       Competition in process and market design
   (620) Just as in the case of technology, the Notifying Parties also compete with each other in
         developing new ways to trade, process and clear on their respective platforms. The
         Commission's examination of the case has clearly shown that also this dimension of
         innovation is motivated at least in part in order to keep ahead of the other Party and
         forestall the risk of liquidity moving to the other platform554.
   (621) Examples of competition between the Notifying Parties in this respect have been given
         by a number of customers as follows555.
   (622) [One large customer]* notes, as regards interest rates, competition on "different order
         types, creation of different order books, different APIs and different levels of access".
   (623) B. Metzler states "Liffe offers the interface onto which customers access via separate
         vendor products. Liffe thereby enhances competition between vendor companies for the
         best electronic trading platform for the customer. Eurex supplies the complete direct
         market access to customers."
   (624) Caixa D'Estalvis i Pensions de Barcelona notes that "while EUREX uses a FIFO pattern
         for trading, LIFFE prefers the proportional one."
   (625) DRW Investments states: "Eurex provides better transparency into the life-cycle of our
         orders including detailed execution latency reports."
   (626) Intesa Sanpaolo states that "Eurex supplies its own trading system, whilst for Liffe it is
         necessary to use ones own [in-house] system."556 (although Unicredit states that Eurex's
         trading system will soon be discontinued).
   552
           AFME, agreed minutes of a meeting of 24 August 2011 [...]*.
   553
           FT article, Europe's two big derivatives exchanges compete head-on, 9 November 2006, available at:
           http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/59bd1750-6f99-11db-ab7b-0000779e2340.html#axzz1TJtvdq00.
   554
           See SO, sections 2.6.1 and 2.6.2.
   555
           References in the following paragraphs are all to replies to question 58 of Q8 – Questionnaire to
           customers, phase II [...]*.
   556
           Original: "Eurex fornisce un sistema proprio per il trading mentre con Liffe è necessario utilizzare il
           proprio."
EN                                                       145                                                       EN

   (627) SNS Securities states that "the way in which the platforms operate is completely
         different. Eurex is order driven and Euronext is quote driven. The latter requires a lot
         more IT capacity but in return provides much more transparency. With an order driven
         market it can happen that for certain series there are no prices. In Quote driven
         [markets] there are always prices in all series."557
   (628) Société Générale states that the Notifying Parties compete "on collocation services and
         market data for example".
   (629) [Another customer]* nevertheless presents a different view: [...]*
                            11.2.1.3.4.4.       Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO
   (630) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties argue that, since in their view they do
         not compete head-to-head in interest rate and other derivatives, their incentives to
         innovate in technology and market design do not come primarily from each other but
         from other, broader influences including the CME, other exchanges, potential entrants,
         OTC trading, and strong countervailing buyer power. They conclude that the merged
         entity will continue to have every incentive to innovate in technology and market
         design558.
   (631) They proceed to argue that the Notifying Parties' investments in trading technology and
         market design are largely specific to their own products and that, because their main
         interest rate products trade entirely differently and use different matching algorithms,
         investments by one Party in trading technology for its main interest rate contracts
         would be of no relevance for the other Party. The Notifying Parties' investments in
         trading technology and market design, they argue, are intended to increase trading
         volumes by making their own products more attractive to traders (faster, easier to use,
         amenable to additional trading strategies, etc.) not to induce switching from other
         contracts that users do not in any event regard as substitutes559.
   (632) Finally, the Notifying Parties qualify the evidence contained in the SO as "a few
         scattered quotes from market participants" and submit that "other respondents in the file
         express different views"560.
                            11.2.1.3.4.5.       Analysis of the Notifying Parties' arguments in the response
                                 to the SO
   (633) From the arguments set out in the previous Section, it appears that the Notifying Parties,
         in their response to the SO, do not properly characterise either the argument which was
         made by the Commission in the SO or the evidence in support of it.
   557
           Original: "Manier waarop de platformen draaien zijn kompleet verschillend. Eurex is order driven en
           Euronext is quote driven. De laatste vraagt meer IT capasiteit maar levert daar tegenover veel meer
           transparantie. Bij een orderdriven market is het mogelijk dat er in bepaalde series geen prijzen staan.
           In Quote driven staan altijd prijzen in alle series."
   558
           Notifying Parties' response to SO, Interest Rate Derivatives, paragraph 191.
   559
           Notifying Parties' response to SO, Interest Rate Derivatives, paragraph 193.
   560
           Notifying Parties' response to SO, Interest Rate Derivatives, paragraph 194.
EN                                                        146                                                      EN

   (634) The Commission did not argue that there were no exogenous incentives for the
         Notifying Parties to invest in technology and market design, nor that such incentive
         would disappear as a result of the notified transaction.
   (635) Rather, the Commission concluded in the SO that, post-merger, the intensive and unique
         competition between the Notifying Parties in technology, process and market design
         would be lost, since this competition is based on the need to forestall unique
         competitive threats to the Notifying Parties' respective franchises from the other
         Party561. This competition contributes, to a non-negligible extent, to the incentive to
         innovate in these areas and therefore the notified transaction would be likely to lead to
         lower innovation in technology solutions, fewer new services, and less innovation in
         market design in respect of services for trading, registering and clearing European
         interest rate and equity derivatives.
   (636) The Commission considers therefore that the Notifying Parties have not provided
         evidence to modify the preliminary conclusions which it reached in this respect in the
         SO. The weight of evidence from the market investigation supports the position set out
         in the SO and cannot be dismissed as "a few scattered quotes". On the contrary, this
         evidence is all the more compelling given that it is widely recognised that the incentives
         to innovate do not exclusively derive from the competitive interaction between the
         Notifying Parties and therefore, as the Notifying Parties themselves point out, many
         respondents do expect such innovation to continue to some degree. Notwithstanding
         this, there is still an expectation that the incentive to innovate will be reduced.
   (637) The Notifying Parties' argument that all investments by each of the Notifying Parties in
         technology pertain exclusively to separate product markets must similarly be rejected.
         While this may be true in part, the Notifying Parties' many services – including co-
         location services (in the case of DB, under an outsourcing arrangement) and
         connectivity solutions are used by all of their products, including those, where they
         actually compete at present and also those for which they are the closest potential
         competitor. They also offer integrated trading and clearing platforms.
   (638) Moreover, investments in technology for a particular product may be designed to head
         off potential competition in that product and, even if prompted by user requests, the
         need to respond to these requests is certainly influenced by the threat of potential
         competition. As indicated by AFME, in cash markets the introduction of competition
         has resulted in enormous improvements in technology, by both challengers and
         incumbents, investments which were not made at an earlier stage562. As LSE points out,
         "it was notable at the Oral Hearing that the Notifying Parties did not seem to attribute
         importance to innovative competition around technology development, business models,
         or service, notwithstanding that, in Turquoise's experience, such dynamics of
         competition are highly relevant to customers and are at the forefront of customer
         demand."563
   (639) As shown in sections 11.2.1.3.5.2 and 11.2.1.3.5.3 above, the market investigation
         provided strong evidence that a move to near-monopoly, in respect of the relevant
   561
          See SO, paragraph 396.
   562
          Agreed minutes of a meeting with AFME of 24 August 2011, paragraph 17 [...]*.
   563
          LSE, Preliminary Response to SO, 31 October 2011, p.4 [...]*.
EN                                                  147                                             EN

          product markets concerned by this Decision will result in a diminished incentive to
          innovate and in service offerings which would be less innovative and responsive to
          users' needs.
                             11.2.1.3.4.6.      Conclusions on competition in technology, process and
                                  market design
   (640) The Commission therefore concludes that the notified transaction, by eliminating actual
          and potential competition between the Notifying Parties in European interest rate
          derivatives, equity derivatives and equity index derivatives, lessens the incentive which
          the merged entity would have to innovate in technology, process and market design in
          order to respond to these same competitive threats, and would result overall in less
          innovation being available to customers in those markets.
       11.2.1.4.COMPETITION         BETWEEN THE       NOTIFYING PARTIES - EUROPEAN                INTEREST RATE
                  FUTURES AND OPTIONS
                        11.2.1.4.1. Introduction
   (641) European interest rate derivatives represent a significant proportion of derivatives
          contracts based on European underlyings traded in the exchange environment564. Eurex
          and Liffe are currently each other's closest actual and potential competitors in this
          space. Besides the Notifying Parties, there is no other exchange offering significant
          trading in European interest rate derivatives, based on the same currency as the
          Notifying Parties, be they short-term or long-term. CME, the only other player which is
          active in the same European interest rates as the Notifying Parties, is confined to short
          term euro interest rates (Euribor), and has barely any presence even in this area.
   (642) From the outset it should be recalled that this assessment applies for both groups of
          customers identified in the market definition Section of this Decision, namely the
          customers that trade only ETDs and the customers that trade both ETDs and OTC
          derivatives. This is because, as explained in Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.5 of this Decision,
          even for customers for whom ETD lookalikes in the area of interest rate derivatives
          could possibly be an alternative under certain circumstances, the phenomenon of ETD
          lookalikes in the area of interest rate derivatives is of minimal importance and therefore
          not of a nature to alter competitive assessment in this case.
   (643) In respect of interest rate derivatives, the Notifying Parties reiterated at several instances
          that there is no direct overlap in interest rate products and therefore "no overlap means
          low potential for competitive harm".565The following sections will show that, first, the
          claim that there is no direct overlap between Notifying Parties' interest rate products is
          incorrect as Eurex and Liffe overlap with respect to a number of interest rate products.
   564
            The notional value outstanding at 31 December 2010 for trades in European interest rate futures and
            options on organized exchanges represented 22.8 trillion USD (source: BIS,
            http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qa1112_anx23a.pdf, titled "Table 23A: Derivative financial
            instruments traded on organised exchanges by instrument and location"). This is over 9 times the
            outstanding in equity index contracts, which in turn dwarves trading in individual equities.
   565
            See Notifying Parties, Submission in support of merger clearance, 17 January 2012.
EN                                                        148                                                   EN

         Second, even if there was no overlap, the competitive constraint exercised by the mere
         existence of the other party and the threat that it may pose the incumbent by entering its
         territory is particularly powerful in this case, in particular in view of the duopolistic
         market structure which is in addition characterised by high barriers to entry.566
   11.2.1.4.2.      Actual competition in existing interest rate derivatives
                            11.2.1.4.2.1.       Introduction
   (644) Eurex offers 10 LTIR derivatives on its order book and 11 STIR derivatives567. The
         LTIR contracts include the benchmark Euro-Bund, Bobl and Schatz contracts and
         options on these futures, the longer-dated Euro-Buxl contract568, as well as Swiss and
         Italian government bond futures. In the STIR space, Eurex offers a suite of contracts
         based on the three-month Euribor rate as well as futures in one-month EONIA.569
   (645) Liffe, for its part, offers 7 Futures and 9 Options on STIR derivatives.570 Four of these
         are based on three-month Euribor, four on three-month sterling rates, one on one-month
         EONIA and one on three-month Eonia. The others are based on non-European rates
         (Eurodollar, Euroyen etc) that are not the subject of this Decision. It offers three futures
         contracts and an options contract in long-term sterling interest rates (gilts), a range of
         swapnote contracts and a Japanese long-term rate. As regards sterling, it follows that
         Liffe has liquidity throughout the interest rate curve.
   (646) The Notifying Parties argue that given that in their view, the market for interest rate
         derivatives should be subdivided into STIR and LTIR derivatives,571 there is virtually
         no overlap in their interest rate derivatives franchises as Eurex focuses on LTIR
         derivatives while Liffe focuses on STIR derivatives.
   (647) Table 3 illustrates the Notifying Parties' combined market shares on various possible
         candidate markets in the area of European interest rate derivatives in 2010.
         Table 3: Market shares on various possible candidate markets in the area of
         exchange traded derivatives
                                 DB                 NYX                   Combined          Others
   European          interest [40-50%]*             [40-50%]*             [90-100%]*        [0-5%]*  (Nasdaq
   rate         derivatives                                                                 OMX,        Oslo
   566
           See section 11.2.1.7 of this Decision for analysis of barriers to entry.
   567
           Annex 4 to the Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's second RFI of 13 September 2011.
   568
           Euro-Buxl Futures are futures contracts based on a notional long-term debt instruments issued by the
           Federal Republic of Germany, with a remaining term of 24 to 35 years.
   569
           Eonia (Euro OverNight Index Average) is an effective overnight interest rate computed as a weighted
           average of all overnight unsecured lending transactions in the interbank market.
   570
           Annex 4 to the Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's second RFI of 13 September 2011.
   571
           See for instance Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rates derivatives.
EN                                                        149                                                   EN

   (including        options                                                                    Bourse), CME: [0-
   and futures)572                                                                              5%]*
   European          interest [30-40%]*               [60-70%]*           [90-100%]*            [0-5%]* (Nasdaq
                   573
   rates options                                                                                OMX, Oslo Bors),
                                                                                                CME: [0-5%]*
   European                IR [50-60%]*               [30-40%]*           [90-100%]*            [0-5%]* (Nasdaq
   futures574                                                                                   OMX, Oslo Bors)
                                                                                                CME: [0-5%]*
   Euro STIR575                   [0-5%]*             [90-100%]*          [90-100%]*            (CME: [0-5%]*)
   Euro LTIR                      [90-100%]*          [0-5%]*             [90-100%]*            -
   Sterling STIR                  [0-5%]*             [90-100%]*          [90-100%]*            -
   Sterling LTIR                  [0-5%]*             [90-100%]*          [90-100%]*            -
   European LTIR576               [90-100%]*          [0-5%]* (UK) [90-100%]*                   [0-5%]*   (Nasdaq
                                                                                                OMX)
   European STIR577               [0-5%]*             [90-100%]*          [90-100%]*            [0-5%]* (Nasdaq
                                                                                                OMX),     [0-5%]*
                                                                                                (Oslo Bors)
           Source: Compilation of data from various sources: Form CO and third party information.
   (648) From the table above, it follows that should the relevant market comprise all exchange-
         traded European interest rate derivatives (irrespective of currency and instrument), the
         combined market shares of the Notifying Parties would amount to [90-100%]* while no
         other player would have a market share exceeding [0-5%]*.578 In this context, it should
         also be recalled that these market shares have been stable over time. As a result, the
         proposed transaction would lead to a de facto monopoly under this market definition.
         This assessment is the same irrespective of whether the geographic market is EEA or
         wider as Eurex and Liffe are de facto the only players offering trading in European
         interest rate derivatives worldwide.
   (649) If the relevant market were to be subdivided into STIR derivatives and LTIR derivatives
         and on the basis of currency (euro/sterling), the Notifying Parties would overlap in the
   572
           Form CO, Annex D.15.
   573
           Jan-May 2011. Source: World Federation of Exchanges, as provided by AFME, Annex to their reply to
           Q1 – Questionnaire to customers – paragraph 2.7. […]*
   574
           Jan-May 2011. Source: World Federation of Exchanges, as provided by AFME, Annex to their reply to
           Q1 – Questionnaire to customers – paragraph 2.7. […]*
   575
           See the next section for details.
   576
           Form CO, Annex D.15.
   577
           Form CO, Annex D.15.
   578
           CME launched its Euribor futures contract in September 2011, but has achieved very limited volume,
           and hence its share is effectively zero even on the narrowest possible market. The interest rate
           derivatives volumes achieved by Nasdaq OMX and Oslo Bors concern Scandinavian currencies.
EN                                                          150                                                   EN

         area of STIR derivatives as concerns futures and options based on the three month
         Euribor commercial bank rate. As concerns LTIR derivatives, while the Notifying
         Parties do not directly overlap in futures and options based on euro sovereign rate
         underlyings, Liffe's offering of strips, packs and bundles of Euribor futures and of
         longer dated Euribor futures and options provides a certain competitive constraint on
         Eurex's Bobl and Schatz offering since, whilst these products are differentiated, there is
         nonetheless a degree of overlap in demand. In terms of revenue, the Notifying Parties
         are closely balanced with Liffe obtaining Euro […]* and Eurex […]*579. The
         assessment of these market scenarios follows below in Sections 11.2.1.4.2.2 and
         11.2.1.4.2.3.
   (650) It should also be noted that despite the limited observed overlap between the Notifying
         Parties in STIR and LTIR derivatives, the market investigation provided indications
         that the existing competition between Eurex and Liffe in their respective franchises has
         not been as fierce as it could have. For instance, Chi-X Europe indicated that "there is
         no evidence of price competition in related contracts, Liffe has not relisted LTIRs, and
         Eurex has not promoted clearing-related synergies (eg margin offsets between its
         LTIRs and STIRs)."580
   (651) This indication was also confirmed by a DB internal document where in relation to the
         analysis of competitive forces in the market it is stated that "incumbent competitors
         (e.g. Liffe)" are "generally accepting mutually agreed market shares/asset classes" and
         therefore there is "no need to take competitive initiative".581582
   (652) However, the Commission considers for the purpose of this merger case that these
         indications are without prejudice to the substantial evidence of competition between the
         Notifying Parties on which this decision is based.
                            11.2.1.4.2.2.       STIR Derivatives based on euro interest rates
   (653) Actual competition between the Notifying Parties in Euro STIR primarily concerns
         Euribor products. It may also be noted that, in relation to the one-month EONIA
   579
           Form CO, Annexes D.18 and D.19, figures date from 2010.
   580
           Chi-X Europe, reply to Q.46 of Q3 – Questionnaire to Competitors [...]*.
   581
           DB internal document with Reference Doc. DB00000180 - This is without prejudice to the
           compatibility of any possible agreement between the Notifying Parties with Articles 101 and/or 102
           TFEU.
   582
           Asked to explain this comment at the Oral Hearing, the Notifying Parties appeared to argue that the
           "general acceptance" in question was acceptance by the market and not by the Notifying Parties
           themselves. This appears, however, to be an unlikely interpretation of the phrase "mutually agreed". If it
           were to be concluded that the observed degree of competition were reduced as a result of agreements
           between the Notifying Parties, then this degree of competition might not be the relevant benchmark
           against which to assess the competitive harm brought about by the merger. Even on the basis of
           observed competition, nonetheless, the Commission is able to conclude that the notified transaction
           gives rise to a significant impediment to effective competition. In this respect, it is noted that the
           reference to this evidence is included for the purpose of showing the context of the parameters of
           competition existing between the Notifying Parties, while the Commission is not making or relying on a
           formal finding of a restriction pursuant to Article 101 of the Treaty in the context of the present merger
           case.
EN                                                       151                                                          EN

         contract, Eurex decided, at the end of 2002, to introduce a contract583 in competition
         with Liffe. This contract is still available for trading on Eurex, even if, according to the
         Notifying Parties, there was no trading in it in 2011 to date584.
                                11.2.1.4.2.2.1.         Initial competition to establish the Euribor
                                     benchmark
   (654) At the time of introduction of the euro in 1999, competing standards developed for the
         reference money market interest rate, with Liffe initially promoting the Euro Libor rate
         whereas Eurex, initially offered, as of 18 September 1998, both rates585, and subsequently
         decided to support Euribor only.
   (655) The Notifying Parties describe this as follows: "When the Euro was introduced, liquidity
         for the principal pre-Euro currency contract, the Three Month Euromark was primarily
         held on NYSE Liffe. NYSE Liffe had also for some years offered a highly liquid Three
         Month Eurolira contract (referencing short term Italian interest rates) as well as a
         Three Month ECU contract (which referenced interest rates for the European Currency
         Unit (ECU), the forerunner of the Euro), in addition to the non-Euro Sterling and Swiss
         Franc contracts. All of these contracts settled to the relevant British Bankers'
         Association (BBA) LIBOR rate, as indeed did and does the world's largest STIR
         contract, the Eurodollar. NYSE Liffe announced that the ECU contract would convert
         to the Euro contract on a one for one basis and using the same reference rate, i.e. BBA
         LIBOR, and that conversion facilities, with appropriate conversion factors and
         adjustments, would be offered in respect of the Euromark and Eurolira contracts as the
         underlying currencies on which these contracts were based were due to disappear."586
   (656) Following the launch by Eurex of Euribor futures, Liffe launched its own Euribor
         contract in December 1998 and ultimately "won" the battle insofar as the vast majority
         of liquidity in STIR derivatives and Euribor in particular finally settled on Liffe.
         Nonetheless, Liffe is still subject to both actual and potential competition from Eurex in
         Euribor, as discussed in the following sections.
   (657) ICE illustrates this battle as follows: "There are [instances]* where the launch of a new
         derivative contract by Eurex was followed by Liffe and vice versa, e.g. the move from
         LIBOR to EURIBOR based derivatives when [the Euro]* was introduced when Liffe
         and Eurex competed to gain liquidity in Euribor contracts. Liffe was the incumbent and
         managed to persuade its participants to switch all open interest from LIBOR to
         EURIBOR after Eurex launched a rival EURIBOR contract."587
   (658) This is described on the Eurex website in a press release from January 1999 as follows:
         "Eurex, the European derivatives market, wants to focus exclusively on the Euribor as the
   583
          Eurex website, http://www.eurexchange.com/download/documents/circulars/cf0032003e.pdf, viewed
          on 20 September 2011.
   584
          Notifying Parties, Submission of 19 September 2011, p.4.
   585
          Eurex website, http://www.eurexchange.com/download/documents/circulars/cf0501998e.pdf, viewed
          on 29 November 2011.
   586
          Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rates derivatives, paragraph 156.
   587
          ICE, response to question 39 of questionnaire Q3 – questionnaire to competitors [...]*. See also Chi-X
          Europe, response to question 50 of questionnaire Q3 – questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
EN                                                       152                                                     EN

         reference interest rate for money-market derivatives in the future. The development in
         turnover clearly speaks in favor of the Euribor, as the exchange stated in Frankfurt. For
         this reason, trading in the three-month Euro-Libor future will be discontinued at mid-year
         if no more open positions exist in the contract. In the future, the Eurex money-market
         derivatives will be focused on the one-month and three-month Euribor future as well as
         the option on the three-month Euribor future."
   (659) Eurex goes on to state that "the positive trend in Euribor contracts is mainly attributable to
         the overwhelming success of the reference rate itself. Its function as the leading reference
         rate for money-market transactions and over-the-counter derivatives trading in Euroland
         was already clear at the beginning of the year. To promote trading in Euribor products,
         the transaction fees will continue to be waived, as previously announced, up to and
         including March 15. Eurex is also waiving fees until the end of the year for Eurex
         participants who have traded at least 150,000 contracts in three-month money-market
         futures by March 15, 1999."588
   (660) This battle was described at the time in The Economist589. By November 1999, that is to
         say approximately a year later, Liffe claimed business "worth euro 70 trillion in
         Euribor futures, compared with euro 30 trillion on the Eurex exchange in Frankfurt
         and less than euro 5 trillion on the bourse in Paris."590
                                  11.2.1.4.2.2.2.         Ongoing competition in Euribor futures
   (661) Eurex's interest in the Euribor contract, which as indicated above dates from the
         inception of the rate as the benchmark Euro money market rate, has continued until at
         least very recently. Eurex has kept the product listed and achieved small but still non-
         negligible market shares in futures on three month Euribor traded on-book, as shown in
         Table 4.
         Table 4: Market share and volume in futures on 3 month Euribor
   Year                           Liffe             Eurex                  Eurex volume
   2007                       [90-100%]*           [0-5%]*                       […]*
   2008                       [90-100%]*           [0-5%]*                       […]*
   2009                       [90-100%]*           [0-5%]*                       […]*
   2010                       [90-100%]*           [0-5%]*                       […]*
         Source: Commission calculations based on the Notifying Parties' replies to the Request for Information of 25
         November 2011591
   588
           http://www.eurexchange.com/about/press/press_21_en.html, viewed on 29 November 2011.
   589
           Article of October 29 1998, available at http://www.economist.com/node/174375 (titled "The battle of
           the benchmarks", Oct 29th 1998), viewed on 29 November 2011.
   590
           The Guardian, 19 November 1999, http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/1999/nov/19/futures (titled
           "There's life in the old Liffe yet", viewed on 29 November 2011.
   591
           On the basis of partial figures, Eurex volumes would seem to have declined further since the
           announcement of the agreement to merge in early 2011.
EN                                                        153                                                         EN

   (662) Although these numbers may appear small and are minimised by the Notifying
         Parties592, they are very significantly in excess of the market shares achieved by CME
         since the launch of its Euribor futures product, notwithstanding that CME is cited by
         the Notifying Parties as their "closest competitor". Indeed, CME had traded a total of
         only 2,310 Euribor future contracts as of 11 November 2011, and CME’s revenue
         derived from traded Euribor futures has been negligible [...]*593. This trading volume
         represents only one-tenth of Eurex's average monthly volume in 2010.
   (663) In addition to constraining prices, this actual competition underlines the extent of
         potential competition if the product offering of NYSE Liffe were to become less
         attractive. In this context, Nasdaq OMX states that: "While Eurex offers some Euro
         denominated European STIR derivatives contracts in competition with Liffe actual
         competition is marginal as Liffe had 99.8% of the traded volumes in 2010 and 2011,
         respectively. That said, Eurex is the only credible force constraining Liffe in terms of
         setting fees for European STIR derivatives contracts as there is no other player with a
         comparable European interest rate derivatives expertise and standing in the market as
         Eurex and Liffe. It can be taken that Eurex is best suited to enter the STIR business of
         Liffe as it possesses assets such as expertise in the neighbouring European LTIR
         market, specialized software, specialized risk management tools etc. that would enable
         it to extremely easily enter and expand into Liffe’s STIR business." 594
                                   11.2.1.4.2.2.3.       Options on Euribor futures
   (664) In addition to both listing Euribor futures, the Notifying Parties also both list options on
         three month Euribor futures (which CME does not). In respect of this contract, internal
         documents of DB show actual and/or potential competition between the Notifying
         Parties. DB has achieved volumes through its off-order book facility between June
         2010 and January 2011, just prior to the announcement of the merger, as indicated in
         Table 5 which compares Eurex's share to the off-order book volumes of NYSE Liffe595.
         Table 5: Market share and volume in options on three month Euribor futures
              Year                                     Liffe %           Eurex %             Eurex volume
              Jun-10                                [90-100%]*            [0-5%]*                […]*
              Jul-10                                [90-100%]*            [0-5%]*                […]*
              Aug-10                                [90-100%]*            [0-5%]*                […]*
              Sep-10                                [90-100%]*            [0-5%]*                […]*
   592
           In their submission of 1 December in the context of the remedies, the Notifying Parties state (without
           referring to any source) that Eurex accounts for "less than 0.001% of the trading volume in Euribor
           contracts". This understates the correct figure for 2010 by a factor of over 100 ("Briefing Paper on the
           Commitments", p.7).
   593
           CME's response to the Commission's Request for Information of 14 November 2011, non-confidential
           version, point 6, [...]*.
   594
           Nasdaq OMX, reply to question 47 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase II […]*.
   595
           Commission calculations based on Parties' replies to the Commission's Request for Information of 25
           November 2011.
EN                                                       154                                                        EN

                 Oct-10                                    [90-100%]*            [0-5%]*         […]*
                 Nov-10                                    [90-100%]*            [0-5%]*         […]*
   Source:
   Commis
   sion          Dec-10                                    [90-100%]*            [0-5%]*         […]*
   calculati
   ons           Jan-11                                    [90-100%]*            [0-5%]*         […]*
   based on
   the
   Notifying Parties' replies to the Request for Information of 25 November 2011.
   (665) Some background to this development is provided in an internal document of DB.
            [Document reporting confidential discussions between DB and a customer with respect
            to options on STIR products]*596
   (666) The same internal document of DB (Eurex) of July 2010 contains details of a review of
            the current pricing structure of OEU3 [DB internal discussion how to attract more
            volume]*597
   (667) The threat of Eurex steadily gaining position in STIR derivatives is also recognised by
            NYX as a significant threat to Liffe's core business: […]*598
   (668) This rivalry, though recently renascent, appears not to be new. An internal document
            from Liffe in October 2006 mentions that […]*599 The competitive rivalry is also clear
            from a DB internal document from November 2007, where […]* is evaluated "in light
            of Eurex's value proposition to clear […]* STIR futures business and compete with
            Liffe for such products"600.
   (669) The competition from 2010 is commented in an internal document from NYX as well:
            [Eurex is increasing efforts to capture this business and we are discussing ourresponses
            with clients]*601 NYX later reports that [The threat from Eurex is receding but at the
            expense of concessions to clients]*.602
   (670) Inter-dealer broker ICAP similarly notes that: "Eurex do already offer STIR futures and
            options. [Eurex offers] options contracts at a significantly lower cost (4c per lot vs
            c20p including clearing fees) […] This forced Liffe to cut their fees and re-engage their
            customers."603 "In Euribor options, Eurex mounted a campaign throughout 2010, based
            on cheaper execution and clearing fees. This was initially supported by at least one of
            the larger end-users, and succeeded in building up more than 100,000 lots of open
   596
              DB internal document, […]*.
   597
              DB internal document […]*.
   598
              NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, NYSE Liffe
              Business Model & Strategic Planning – submission to FSA, March 2011, p. 61.
   599
              NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, with title,
              Minutes of Executive Committee meeting 30.10.2006, Reference ENX-00778 -00001.
   600
              DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, with title[…]*.
   601
              NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, with title "Risk
              report to the Liffe audit and risk committee", 15 April 2010, Reference ENX-00307-00001, p.5.
   602
              "NYSE Liffe risk summary report to the Liffe audit and risk committee", April 2011, NYX document
              ENX-00311-00001, p.5.
   603
              ICAP, response to question 62 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
EN                                                               155                                              EN

         interest, but in time Liffe eventually lowered their fees… and the Eurex threat went
         away"604.
   (671) Another customer notes that, "more recently Eurex competed with Liffe on STIR options
         and part of that competition was based on trading fees."605
   (672) Eurex also offered flexible options on Euribor, which it similarly withdrew in January
         2011. An internal document from Liffe mentions that "In fixed income products, Eurex
         will introduce flexible options during Q4 2006." 606
                                11.2.1.4.2.2.4.         Commission analysis of the Notifying Parties'
                                    response to the SO
   (673) The Notifying Parties' response to the SO contains no substantive rebuttal of the
         analysis of actual competition in short term interest rates developed by the
         Commission. Rather, this reply limits itself to the statement that "virtually all" liquidity
         in STIR is with NYSE Liffe607 and claiming that the Notifying Parties "do not compete
         in Euribor contracts to any meaningful extent."608 The Commission considers that
         whilst the actual overlap in the products concerned is indeed low given that Liffe
         accounts for the significant majority of liquidity in STIR products, the evidence
         outlined above clearly demonstrates the competitive constraint that Eurex represents to
         Liffe. Eurex's attempts to gain greater liquidity and expand its product range keep Liffe
         "on its toes".
   (674) The Notifying Parties further claim that the fact that "DB does not offer and has not
         offered cross-margining between its LTIR contracts and its Euribor STIR contracts"
         would mean that "the Commission's argument [that DB's large pool of open interest of
         correlated LTIR contracts gives it a decisive advantage] is theoretical rather than
         practical."609
   (675) Whilst the Commission is aware that Eurex does not presently offset its Euribor contract
         against its LTIR contracts, the assertion that such an offset is "theoretical rather than
         practical" is contradicted by at least two other elements provided by the Notifying
         Parties themselves.
   (676) Firstly, the Notifying Parties' in their submission on efficiencies make the following
         claim: "Joint members will gain cross-margining opportunities due to the
         complementarity of the products traded across the combined exchanges. For instance,
         users should achieve margin reductions as a result of being able to offset their positions
         on the short end of the Euro interest rate yield curve (Euribor), where NYSE Liffe has
         substantial open interest, against the long end of the curve (Schatz, Bobl, and Bund),
         where Eurex has substantial open interest. At the moment, these groups of products are
   604
          ICAP, response to question 50of Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II [...]*.
   605
          DRW Investments UK Limited, response to question 55 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   606
          NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, with title,
          Minutes of Executive Committee meeting 30.10.2006, Reference ENX-00778 -00001.
   607
          Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rates derivatives, paragraph 65.
   608
          Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rates derivatives, paragraph 74.
   609
          Notifying Parties, Submission of 1 December 2011, "Effective Competition will Remain in Interest
          Rate Derivatives", p.1.
EN                                                       156                                               EN

         cleared in separate CCPs, although crossmargining already takes place within Eurex
         across the group of Euro long-term bonds, and, as discussed in more detail below,
         within NYSE Liffe Clearing between the short end of the curve and NYSE Liffe
         Clearing’s bond products. Given that Euribor products are highly correlated with long-
         term Euro bonds, considerable additional margin offsets could be achieved when the
         two groups of products are cleared within a single CCP."610
   (677) This statement of the Notifying Parties is not framed by them as being purely
         "theoretical" but presented as being an almost automatic outcome of the fact that, post-
         merger, the two sets of products would be cleared in one place, namely in Eurex
         Clearing, and this notwithstanding the fact that Eurex Clearing does not, today, offer
         such offsets between its own Euribor contracts which are already currently cleared
         within the same CCP as its LTIR contracts. The qualification of this possibility as
         purely "theoretical" would therefore imply, ipso facto, that the claims related to the
         existence of collateral savings post-merger as between STIR and LTIR are equally
         "theoretical".
   (678) Secondly, Eurex Clearing itself is currently migrating to a new portfolio-based risk
         management model ("PRISMA") which is precisely intended to allow for greater
         offsets between correlated products within a clearing member's portfolio. Given that
         this project has already been announced to the market for introduction in June 2012611,
         it is certainly not "theoretical".
   (679) Moreover, NYSE Liffe already applies a high offset between its sterling STIR and LTIR
         products, and even between Euribor and sterling LTIR, again showing that this
         possibility is not "theoretical".
   (680) The Commission therefore concludes Eurex and Liffe are each other's closest and de
         facto only competitors in the area of European STIR derivatives and in particular
         Euribor futures and options. This conclusion applies irrespective of whether the
         geographic scope of the market is worldwide or EEA as the Notifying Parties are de
         facto the only relevant competitors in this space. It follows that the proposed transaction
         would lead to a near-monopoly in the area of European STIR derivatives. Should the
         market be further subdivided into futures and options, the notified transaction would
         also result in a near-monopoly for futures, with CME being the only remaining player
         exerting a very limited constraining force, and in a monopoly for Euribor options.
   610
           Compass Lexecon, "Cross-margining efficiencies induced by the Deutsche Börse / NYSE Euronext
           merger", document dated 5 September 2011, p.7.
   611
           Eurex                       Clearing                      Circular                    074/11,
           http://www.eurexchange.com/download/documents/circulars/cf0742011e.pdf, viewed on 8 December
           2011.
EN                                                   157                                                 EN

                            11.2.1.4.2.3.       European interest rate derivatives providing longer term
                                 exposure
                                 11.2.1.4.2.3.1.         Competition in mid-term euro interest rates
   (681) The Notifying Parties also offer a competitive constraint to each other in the mid-range
         of the Euro interest rate curve by virtue of Liffe's offering of strips and bundles of
         Euribor futures. Also simple Euribor futures in forward months provide exposure to
         interest rates in the future, and albeit that the rate in question is the commercial three-
         month interbank rate, this rate is increasingly correlated to other long term rates the
         further out the contract in question.612 Liffe currently offers 24 quarterly contract
         months for Euribor futures, allowing exposure of up to 6 years to be gained.613
         Although the Notifying Parties correctly point out that their products are based on
         different underlying rates and are therefore not perfect substitutes for each other,
         Euribor products can for certain purposes be alternatives to the hedge available using
         the Bobl or Schatz.
   (682) This was confirmed by NYSE Liffe in an internal document as recently as December
         2009, which states that […]*614 The relevance of this final comment should also not be
         neglected, since interest rate swaps, which may extend into very long maturities, are also
         priced off the Euribor curve but generally hedged on-exchange with Eurex's LTIR
         contracts, even though those contracts refer to a different underlying curve.
   (683) The background to this competitive interaction is as follows. Unlike equity and equity
         index derivatives, the interest rate market is characterised by the fact that certain liquid
         benchmark products are widely used for hedging purposes even if they offer only an
         imperfect hedge615. For this reason, competition between the Notifying Parties, whilst it
         may involve head-to-head competition as in the case of Euribor, also takes the form of
         launching differentiated products designed better to appeal to a hedging need than an
         existing contract. This type of contract may draw away a part of the demand from the
         existing contract.
   (684) The resulting competitive constraint in this case appears to be asymmetric, since the
         contracts in question are subject to a constraint from their larger rival, but insofar as
   612
          See for instance NYX' internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011,
          NYSE Liffe Business Model & Strategic Planning, March 2011, Reference: ENX-00002-00015, p.16
          […]*.
   613
          Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011, question 1a). Indeed, real-time
          pricing of these bundles is available online at liffepacksandbundles.if5.com.
   614
          See the NYSE document with reference ENX – 00049 – 00001, Memo to Members of the Liffe Board
          "Business Report", dated 10 December 2009, page 6 .
   615
          In addition to being conceded by the Notifying Parties, this point is made by third parties. For example
          ICAP argues that interest rate ETDs "will not allow a customer to obtain a complete hedge against the
          economic risk they face but have the advantage of immediacy and high liquidity… In OTC inter-dealer
          markets, the banks make prices to each other, and actively 'take' offers or bids from the exchange
          central order book to temporarily hedge OTC positions. Although an ETD position is imperfect and
          only suitable risk mitigation for a short duration, its immediacy due to high liquidity allows it to be used
          this way very efficiently". (Observations submitted on 26 October 2011, paragraphs 6.6 and 6.21, [...]*
EN                                                       158                                                           EN

         they represent a better alternative for only a relatively small part of demand, may not
         influence the pricing of the benchmark product itself.
   (685) Liffe offers a means to trade strips of Euribor futures in order to mimic longer term
         exposure, in direct competition, as it itself indicates, to Eurex's Bund/Bobl/Schatz
         franchise, especially the 2 to 5 year instruments. Liffe claimed in 2005 that "trading
         packs and bundles can offer a more efficient hedge than trading Bond (sic) futures,
         because they offer greater access to the yield curve, without the need to 'roll' positions.
         Strips, packs and bundles on LIFFE CONNECT are competitively priced against Bond
         futures, e.g. trading a two-year Euribor bundle is cheaper than the equivalent Schatz
         futures transaction; trading a five-year Euribor bundle is cheaper than the equivalent
         Bobl futures transaction"616.
   (686) The relevant products are described by NYX as follows: "NYSE Liffe’s packs and
         bundles are recognized trading strategies that enable you to easily execute a
         combination of contract months in Short-Term Interest Rate (STIR) Euribor and
         Sterling futures contracts –- in one trade and at a single, significantly reduced cost.
         This allows users to gain exposure to longer term interest rates, without the legging
         risk and cost of trading the individual months. Packs and bundles are similar to strips,
         however with legs of equal volume."617 "Euribor® and Short Sterling packs and
         bundles allow you to trade a combination of outright delivery months in just one trade,
         providing exposure to longer term interest rates without the need to roll positions -
         meaning they are an ideal alternative to trading shorter term bonds and swaps".618
   (687) Liffe indicates that this offering is particularly suitable for traders wishing to hedge
         swap exposure in the interbank market on exchange, who would otherwise use the
         Schatz and Bobl for this purpose though it was a less accurate hedge: "Government /
         Treasury debt might not be considered a suitable hedge for inter-bank lending; i.e.
         Schatz is a less effective hedge for swap exposure compared to Euribor 2yr Bundle"619
   (688) Trading in Euribor strips, packs and bundles has been increasing in recent months
         relative to trading in the Bobl and Schatz and has represented between […]* of the total
         in most months since January 2010.620 Relative to the Schatz alone, which they are
         better placed to emulate as it is the shorter term instrument over which period there is
         greater liquidity in Euribor futures, these figures, and the associated competitive
         restraint, are even higher.
   (689) This increase in the trading of these strips, packs and bundles on Liffe may explain the
         assessment made by DB in an internal document: […]*.
   (690) The competitive relationship between Euribor strips, packs and bundles and from
         forward Euribor futures contracts on the Schatz and Bobl has been confirmed in the
   616
          See http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/010/620/106201.pdf, viewed on 20 September 2011.
   617
          See NYX website, available at http://globalderivatives.nyx.com/stirs/nyse-liffe/pack-bundles, viewed
          on 20 September 2011.
   618
          Email from NYSE Liffe Marketing on 14 December 2010 16:49, Annex 4.01 to the Notifying Parties' reply
          to the Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011.
   619
          Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011, Packs and Bundles DMM
          Programme, Annex 4.11.
   620
          Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011, Annex 16.
EN                                                     159                                                      EN

         market investigation, where respondents have noted that "Liffe's longest STIR contract
         is … longer than the shortest LTIR contract offered by EUREX"621 and that whilst "the
         exchanges generally operate at different points on the yield curve, Liffe short end and
         Eurex long, but in the medium term they certainly compete, contracts such as the schatz
         and bobl competing with Liffe's STIR contracts for participants looking for exposure in
         these sectors."622
                                 11.2.1.4.2.3.2.         Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO
   (691) In their response on this point to the SO, the Notifying Parties argue that "even if STIR
         and LTIR futures can offer exposure to similar maturities, this does not mean that they
         can be used interchangeably to hedge the same risk. Since there is no single yield curve
         describing the cost of money for every borrower, any substitution between strips of
         STIR derivatives based on interbank rates and LTIR products based on medium-term
         government bonds will leave the user with significant basis risk."623
   (692) In the SO, the Commission also presented an argument regarding strips, packs and
         bundles in relation to innovation, namely that "this type of innovation would very likely
         not have been introduced had it not been for the competitive relationship between the
         Notifying Parties, since if it had been introduced by Eurex it would have risked
         cannibalizing revenues and liquidity in its flagship interest rate products. It is therefore
         innovation of a type which would in all likelihood be lost as a result of the merger."624
   (693) In reply to this point, the Notifying Parties point out that when NYSE Liffe introduced
         strips (1994) and packs and bundles (1998), it still offered German government bond
         derivatives. In their view, [NYX would not have had any incentive to offer these
         products if they could have had an impact on other products' liquidity]*625
                                 11.2.1.4.2.3.3.         Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the
                                     SO
   (694) The reference made by the Notifying Parties to "basis risk" when trading STIR rather
         than LTIR describes incorrectly the competitive relationship between them pointed to
         by the Commission in the SO. Indeed, the Notifying Parties seem here to contradict
         arguments which they make elsewhere, recognizing that there may be a trade-off
         between liquidity and accuracy for hedging interest rates, since they state in the Form
         CO that "users seeking to hedge exposure to government debt instruments (or, indeed,
         any risk) with a futures contract are generally more concerned with the liquidity of the
         contract in question than the accuracy of hedge it provides."626
   621
           ICE, response to question 15 of Q 3 – Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   622
           DRW Investments UK Limited, response to question 55 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*. See
           also reply of ICAP to the same question explaining that "At the margins there is also some competition
           between different contracts: for example a 'strip' or 'stack' of Euribor STIR futures vs a schatz
           contract." [...]*.
   623
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 15.
   624
           Paragraph 301 of the SO.
   625
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 80.
   626
           Form CO, Derivatives ., paragraph 6.50.
EN                                                        160                                                     EN

   (695) The Notifying Parties similarly argue in the Form CO that "the importance of liquidity
         is also underlined by the example of NYSE Liffe's Swapnote contracts, which were
         introduced in 2001 and have as their underlying asset the European interbank yield
         curve. Although the Parties assume that for a significant number of traders, the risks
         they are exposed to (IRS contracts, which are referenced to the interbank yield curve
         rather than the government bond curve) would be more accurately hedged with this
         contract than, for example, with Eurex's capital market derivatives on German
         government bonds, the trading volumes in Swapnote have remained very low. This
         reflects the fact that (except for a small minority of customers who place a high value
         on eliminating basis risk and thus seek a very precise hedge) derivative traders tend to
         value liquidity over accuracy in their hedging instruments."627
   (696) It follows from this that while customers may have preference for one underlying over
         another, for instance a commercial interbank rate, their preference for greater liquidity
         may result in them nonetheless choosing to hedge using a different but related interest
         rate underlying, namely the German sovereign interest rate curve. As with any
         differentiated products, however, there will be a group of customers whose preference
         at any given moment will be determined by various considerations including pricing,
         available liquidity at that moment, collateral costs etc. Since only a relatively small part
         of demand for Euro LTIR products is specifically related to a desire to hedge the
         German sovereign rate, and much of it relates to hedging of other eurozone sovereign
         rates as well as commercial rates, a large majority of traders in euro LTIR are accepting
         basis risk by doing so, not only those who consider using Liffe's Euribor products but
         also those who only use the products of Eurex and for whom those products are
         certainly (all other things being equal) better suited.
   (697) The Notifying Parties have brought evidence in their response to the SO to suggest that
         this group of customers is presently sufficiently small relative to the total demand for
         Eurex's euro LTIR contracts that it is unlikely that the latter would be priced to respond
         to this part of demand, or, as they put it, […]*628 and […]*629. However, the opposite
         does not follow, and it remains a fact that the products offered by Liffe target a part of
         demand which, in their absence, would otherwise be likely to fall on Eurex. Even if
         such demand would not be of sufficient size in itself to justify an increase in price for
         LTIR products post-merger, the notified transaction would result either, if the products
         were withdrawn (which is unlikely) in the loss of a more attractive alternative for the
         group of customers in question or, in the more likely event that they were retained630, in
         additional pricing power for the longer dated and composite STIR products, since the
         threat of diversion of demand to LTIR products would be internalised.
   (698) Moreover, the Notifying Parties even appear to recognize that, when the purpose is to
         hedge interest rate swaps (IRS), the two products may be substitutable. Whilst in the
         Form CO, as noted above, they recognize the use of LTIR to hedge IRS, in the response
         to the SO they note that "trading in Euribor packs, strips and bundles is a specific
   627
           Form CO, Derivatives ., paragraph 7.26.
   628
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 79.
   629
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 82.
   630
           The CME/CBOT merger resulted in such a combination of short and long term interest rate products,
           including longer dated STIR and strips, packs and bundles on Eurodollar, and these products are still
           offered.
EN                                                        161                                                    EN

         strategy, used by dealers looking to hedge OTC interest rate swaps and forward rate
         agreements"631: that is to say exactly those dealers who might use LTIR for the same
         purpose.
   (699) Even if the final observation of the Notifying Parties in relation to the argument it had
         previously made concerning cannibalisation were to be accepted, it clearly does not
         follow from the mere fact that a hypothetical monopolist might wish to retain two
         products that it would not have additional market power in relation to one or other of
         them. This fact alone therefore does not invalidate the present analysis.
   (700) The Commission therefore concludes that Eurex and Liffe are each other's closest actual
         competitors in the area of European LTIR derivatives, in particular as concerns the mid-
         range of the euro interest rate curve. This conclusion applies irrespective of whether the
         geographic scope of the market is worldwide or EEA as the Notifying Parties are de
         facto the only relevant competitors in this space. It follows that the notified transaction
         eliminates the closest actual and potential competitor in the mid-range of the euro
         interest rate curve, resulting in the loss of a competitive constraint on Liffe for longer
         dated and composite Euribor contracts.
                           11.2.1.4.2.4.      Conclusion
   (701) The Commission therefore concludes that the combination of the Notifying Parties'
         businesses would eliminate actual competition between Eurex and Liffe in respect of
         European interest rate derivatives, and in particular in Euribor futures and options,
         removing the closest competitor, and in the mid-range of the euro interest rate curve,
         resulting in the loss of a competitive constraint on Liffe for longer dated and composite
         Euribor contracts. This conclusion is valid irrespective of whether there is one market
         encompassing all interest rate derivatives or separate markets for short-term and long-
         term interest rate derivatives. Indeed, if the market were one for all interest rate
         derivatives, the Notifying Parties would de facto be the only two players together
         controlling [90-100%]* of the market. Similarly, should the market be subdivided into
         short-term and long-term interest rate derivatives, the notified transaction would
         eliminate competition between the Notifying Parties in the benchmark short-term
         interest rate derivatives contract, Euribor, and in a number of mid-range interest-rate
         derivatives contracts. As explained in the relevant Sections of this Decision, this
         conclusion applies irrespective of the geographic market definition as under all possible
         scenarios, the Notifying Parties are de facto the only two players active in this space.
   631
          Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 39.
EN                                                       162                                         EN

   11.2.1.4.3. Potential competition in European interest rate derivatives where one
       party has the bulk of the liquidity
                            11.2.1.4.3.1.     Introduction
   (702) As indicated in Section 11.2.1.3.2 of this Decision, Eurex and Liffe constrain each
         other, by virtue of potential competition, even in products where the bulk of liquidity
         has settled on one of their platforms. Even if the possibility to trade a given product on
         the other platform is not offered today, the other Party is uniquely placed to launch a
         product at short notice which would compete either head-to-head – by reproducing the
         economic payoff of the existing product - or compete for a segment of demand which is
         currently imperfectly served by the existing product.
   (703) The threat of entry, and even more so actual preparations to enter, may have a
         significant impact on prices. An illustration of the disciplining effect that the existence
         of a competitor may generally have on an incumbent in the interest rate sphere is Eurex
         US' attempt to enter the US treasuries market and its impact on CME. As CME
         indicated, "In one case, Eurex US, where the new entrant offered very substantial fee
         and ownership incentives, CBOT reduced its trading fees, made new clearing
         arrangements and secured an improved trading platform."632 Several similar instances
         between the Notifying Parties are described in the following Sections 11.2.1.4.3.2
         through 11.2.1.4.3.4.
   (704) Internal documents of the Notifying Parties provide evidence of […]*.633 It should be
         stressed that moving liquidity to an existing rival platform with a large margin pool of
         correlated contracts, however challenging that may be, is in any case significantly
         easier than trying to move such liquidity to a platform with no such advantage (see
         further Section 11.2.1.7 below).
   (705) Nasdaq OMX notes that "There is no actual [i.e. current] competition between Eurex
         and Liffe on European LTIRs. Eurex offers LTIR derivatives on German, Swiss and
         Italian bonds whereas Liffe offers only (GBP denominated) LTIR derivatives on UK
         bonds. That said, Eurex and Liffe constrain each other in terms of setting fees for
         European LTIR derivatives, i.e. each is the other’s most important potential competitor.
         It can be taken that each company is best suited to enter the business of the other party
         as it possesses assets such as expertise in the European LTIR market, specialized
         software, specialized risk management tools etc. that would enable it to extremely
         easily enter and expand into the other’s business. Post merger no other player would
         constrain the merged entity in European LTIR derivatives contracts as there is no other
         player with a comparable European interest rate derivatives expertise and standing in
         the market as Eurex and Liffe."634
   (706) Indeed, the Notifying Parties themselves appear to accept the importance of the
         potential competition constraint in their response to the SO, disputing only which entity
   632
           CME, response to question 44 of Q3 – Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   633
           See footnote 596 of this Decision.
   634
           Reply to question 46 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase II [...]*.
EN                                                     163                                           EN

         is best placed to provide it, as they state "It is common ground [between the
         Commission and the Notifying Parties] that shifting liquidity in a benchmark contract
         away from the incumbent derivatives exchange is difficult, but it does not at all follow
         that the possibility of a successful entry by the CME does not constrain NYX and Eurex,
         respectively."635
   (707) The market investigation showed that Liffe and Eurex, due to their deep and correlated
         margin pools in the area of European interest rate derivatives are best placed to compete
         with each other and to attack the other's franchises. For instance, Chi-X Europe outlined
         that " it would be extremely difficult if not impossible for any exchange other than Liffe
         or Eurex to compete… in the interest rate derivative space as no other exchanges can
         offer cross-product synergies along the interest curve capable of challenging the
         position held by Liffe and Eurex."636
   (708) In the following sections, examples of potential competition are reviewed in respect of
         each of the main product classes of the Notifying Parties in European interest rates
         derivatives where, on the basis of potential markets for European STIR and LTIR
         futures and options, there would presently not be actual competition strictly speaking,
         namely Eurex's euro LTIR products, the flagship German Bund, Bobl and Schatz
         contracts as well as Italian Euro-BTP futures, and NYSE Liffe's sterling contracts, both
         short and long term. The source for most of these examples are high-level internal
         documents of the Notifying Parties and the legal test applied is that specified in Section
         11.2.1.1.1 of this Decision. The points made by the Notifying Parties in response to the
         SO are discussed at the end of each subsection, but overall conclusions left to the end of
         this Section (11.2.1.4.3.6).
                            11.2.1.4.3.2.       Bund-Bobl-Schatz
                                 11.2.1.4.3.2.1.         Battle of the Bund
   (709) The first and most notable historical example of competition between the Notifying
         Parties was the so-called "Battle of the Bund".637 The Bund was already traded in
         London since 1988 before Eurex (then the DTB) launched in 1990 substantially the
         same contract.
   (710) The "Battle of the Bund"638 is instructive insofar as it shows that even the entire
         liquidity in one contract can shift from one exchange to another under certain
         circumstances. This refers to the period when Liffe, having first introduced the Bund
         contract, eventually lost a liquidity battle to an identical contract introduced by the DTB
         two years later. Although the shifting of liquidity in the Bund contract occurred in
         specific circumstances, including the introduction by DTB of electronic trading in
         competition to the floor trading model operated by Liffe but also other factors639, this
   635
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 115.
   636
           Chi-X Europe, response to question 43 of Q3 – Questionnaire to Competitors [...]*.
   637
           See SO, Section 2.2.2.2.
   638
           Battle of the Bund refers to the successful attempt of Eurex to attract liquidity in the Eurobund contract
           which was initially controlled by Liffe.
   639
           See for example Competition between Exchanges: Lessons from the Battle of the Bund by Estelle
           Cantillon and Pai-Ling Yin, June 12, 2008.
EN                                                        164                                                         EN

         episode demonstrates that it is conceivable that an incumbent's position can be
         challenged once liquidity settles on one platform (and by extension constrained on an
         ongoing basis).
   (711) As already mentioned at Recital (575) above, as competition was unfolding one Liffe
         board member pointed out: […]*640 [We could be forced to cut our fees; however there
         is no need to go to 0]*641 DTB did however cut to zero642, and won the contract.
   (712) The episode illustrates the nature of the constraint that the Notifying Parties represent on
         one another even for products for which the liquidity has settled on one platform. As ICAP
         points out: "Even though it is rare that a contract “moves” from one exchange to the other
         (as with the Bund contract) and it requires a very significant investment, such a win could
         be worth approximately €200m per annum (for the Euribor futures complex, or the
         Bund/Bobl/Schatz) to the exchange. As a result of the significant profits at stake, the mere
         presence of a significant competitor makes competition relevant in this industry even if
         there is no “overlap” in contracts between the exchanges as competitors understand that
         should there be any misstep by any of them, the other will grasp the opportunity to move
         into their space. If the proposed transaction were implemented, the next available
         competitor would be so remote that the merged company no longer would consider it a
         relevant rival."643
                                11.2.1.4.3.2.2.         EuroMTS Bond Index Futures
   (713) In 2006, Liffe perceived another market opportunity to challenge the strength of the
         long term interest rate franchise of Eurex based around German government debt, and
         launched, in cooperation with the EuroMTS Bond market (now controlled by LSE) an
         index future on Eurozone sovereign debt, the EuroMTS Government Bond Index
         Futures.644 This offer consists of a series of futures contracts listed on indices from the
         EuroMTS Government Broad Index family, which is made up of Eurozone government
         bonds and individual country sub-indices, each covering the various maturity bands645.
   (714) At the time, it was argued that there would be substantial market interest for the new
         products due to the inherent inadequacy of hedging pan-euro exposure with just the
         German benchmark rate.
   640
           i.e. Deutsche Terminboerse, the forerunner of Eurex.
   641
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Memorandum,
           Bund team & Management Committee, 6 August 1997.
   642
           RBS, reply to question 58 of Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II [...]*.
   643
           Response to question 48 of Q1 – Questionnaire to Customers [...]*.
   644
           See SO, section 2.2.2.4.
   645
           See in this regard the open letter of Hugh Freedberg to Financial Times at the time of DB's bid for
           Euronext in 2006, which stated "In interest rate derivatives, Eurex and Euronext.liffe compete directly
           across the 2-5 year maturity range of the interest rate yield curve and will soon compete across the 7-
           10 year maturity range when we launch bond index futures.", FT article, Europe's two big derivatives
           exchanges compete head-on, available at:
           http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/59bd1750-6f99-11db-ab7b-0000779e2340.html#axzz1TJtvdq00
           (viewed on 26 January 2012)
EN                                                      165                                                        EN

   (715) An article in the trade journal "Futures and Options Week"646 provided by the Notifying
         Parties indicates that these contracts "would undoubtedly be seen as potential
         competition for Eurex's flagship products, the German government debt suite".
         Although a Euronext representative is quoted in the same article as describing the new
         contracts as "a very different animal", in a presentation to the Executive Committee on
         14 August 2006 it is clear that NYX viewed the competition with Eurex as fundamental
         since it is stated that "Eurex Bund futures are already dominant (as a proxy) in this
         space" and that the "difficulties of launching a new contract to compete with an
         established, highly liquid contract" were "understood".647 It can thus be considered that
         Euronext's intention was to capture at least a part of the liquidity which up until that
         point had gone, by proxy, to Bund futures by offering a better tailored product to some
         investors.
   (716) NYX explains that the products [were not as successful as expected and thus were
         delisted]*. Additional reasons for withdrawal were […]* and […]*.648
                                 11.2.1.4.3.2.3.        Recent attempts by Liffe to challenge Eurex
   (717) Although the "Battle of the Bund" occurred in the past, and EuroMTS Bond futures
         have been delisted, internal documents of the Notifying Parties show that NYSE Liffe
         has continued to look for ways to attack Eurex's liquidity in the Bund, Bobl and Schatz.
   (718) A NYX document from August 2007 refers to [the possibility of challenging liquidity
         from other party's products]*649
   (719) This project appears to have been pursued further since an email of early 2009 by
         NYSE Liffe's […]*650 states that the [there is a risk of counterattack]* The reaction of
         Eurex was expected to be accompanied by a number of other non-price measures such
         as: [delays/refusal to provide access to market makers which could impede our products
         launch]*.651
   (720) The threat from potential competition in the euro LTIR space from NYSE Liffe is also
         referenced in an internal document of DB from 2010, which in response to a planned
         competing offer from DB in Euribor options considers the [Consideration of various
         factors]*.652
   646
           Futures and Options week, 6 March 2006, p.1; Annex 8 to the Notifying Parties' reply to the
           Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011.
   647
           Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011, annex 14
   648
           Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011,question 7.
   649
           See NYX internal document: "Email from […]* to ",[…]*, 06.08.2007, Subject Frankfurt, Reference:
           ENX – 00155 – 00001. According to NYX website .[…]*.
   650
           Director Fixed Income at NYSE Liffe and Director Business Development, Liffe.
   651
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, with title Email
           of 16.01.2009 with subject: NYL Product Rollout Presentation Jan 15 2009 v2.ppt, Reference ENX-
           00479-00001.
   652
           DB internal document .[…]*.
EN                                                      166                                                    EN

                                 11.2.1.4.3.2.4.         Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO
   (721) In the response to the SO, the Notifying Parties claim that "the Commission vastly
         overplays internal brainstorming by NYSE Liffe to launch Bund/Bobl/Schatz futures,
         which were never seriously pursued and did not result in any concrete action by
         characterizing these as a 'battle for liquidity' in which the Parties were 'locked in'."653
   (722) As for EuroMTS Bond Index Futures, the Notifying Parties claim that the SO
         "speculates, without any foundation, that in 2006 'Liffe perceived a market opportunity
         to challenge the strength of the long term interest rate franchise of Eurex' as the
         rationale for the launch of EuroMTS Bond Futures." In reality, [according to the
         Notifying Parties, these initiatives were made to support EuroMTS, not to compete with
         Eurex]*654 In summary, in the Notifying Parties' view, these products were "clear
         failures without any meaningful commercial relevance"655
                                 11.2.1.4.3.2.5.         Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the
                                     SO
   (723) The statements made by the Notifying Parties miss the point. It is unconvincing to
         dismiss statements made by senior staff as mere "brainstorming" and, in any case, it is
         apparent that DB has taken the threat of competition seriously. Moreover, if such
         competition has not materialised in practice, the very fact that it is being considered
         demonstrates a competitive constraint that would be eliminated by the merger. As ICAP
         noted in its submission before the Oral Hearing, "Each of Liffe and Eurex, therefore, are
         well aware that the mere presence of the other involves a threat of switching if they do not
         perform in an efficient and cost-effective manner." 656
   (724) In relation to the EuroMTS Bond Index Futures, the Commission considers that the
         sources it has cited speak for themselves as regards the competitive relationship to
         Bund, Bobl and Schatz, and hardly qualify as "speculation". In any event, the
         Commission also notes that the Notifying Parties, although they offer an entirely
         different rationale for the launch of these products in the response to the SO, have not
         pointed to any evidence, whether in the public domain or in internal documents, to back
         up their alternative account. The weight of evidence therefore leads to the conclusion
         that the competitive threat is a real one.
   (725) In any case, it is also not evident that the two explanations are inconsistent; on the
         contrary, rivalry between MTS and DB in relation to bonds is matched by the rivalry
         described between Liffe and Eurex in bond derivatives. The desire to establish a pan-
         European bond index is therefore part and parcel of the attempt made at the time to
         move the market away from sole use of the German sovereign rate as the long term
         benchmark, an attempt which concerned both cash instruments and derivatives.
         Whether or not the project failed, it represents an instance of actual, even if limited,
   653
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 182.
   654
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives paragraph 174.
   655
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives paragraph 185.
   656
           ICAP, Observations submitted on 26 October 2011, paragraph 8.4 [...]*.
EN                                                        167                                               EN

         competition in the past and illustrates the constraint from potential competition to Eurex
         in respect of its euro LTIR franchise.
                           11.2.1.4.3.3.      Euro-BTP Futures
                           11.2.1.4.3.3.1. Competitive interaction
   (726) Euro-BTP Futures contracts are based on notional debt instruments issued by the
         Republic of Italy ("Buoni del Tesoro Poliennali") and were first introduced by Eurex in
         September 2009.657
   (727) According to Eurex, "Since the introduction of Long-Term Euro-BTP Futures in
         September 2009 more than three million contracts have been traded with an average
         daily volume exceeding 12,400 contracts in July 2011. In October 2010 Eurex
         Exchange expanded its suite of BTP futures contracts by successfully launching Short-
         Term Euro-BTP Futures. More than 510,000 contracts have been traded since the
         launch with average daily volumes of more than 2,300 contracts in July 2011. With
         over 125 members using BTP Futures, the contracts have enjoyed diverse support.
         Furthermore market participants have been very satisfied with the development of the
         futures contract during the sovereign risk turmoil and periods of volatility in the cash
         markets."658
   (728) Notional volumes in the Long-Term Euro-BTP Futures (FBTP) range between 130 and
         215 percent of the deliverable bonds in the underlying 10-year cash market (traded on
         MTS), demonstrating the liquidity of the contract.
   (729) Following the introductions of the Long and Short-Term Euro-BTP Futures, Eurex
         completed its BTP yield curve offering by introducing the Mid-Term Euro-BTP Future
         in September 2011 creating, in its view, three further trading opportunities: an efficient
         and cost effective instrument to hedge medium-term Italian debt on-exchange thereby
         removing the basis risk present when hedging with Euro-Bobl Futures; an alternative to
         cash bonds to trade the 5-year yield spread between German and Italian government
         debt; and opportunities to trade the 2.5 and 10-year spreads on the Italian yield curve.
   (730) In this regard, NYX notes that [We considered launching BTP futures, as Eurex did, but
         we decided not to after consulting clients]*.659
                               11.2.1.4.3.3.2.         Points made by the Notifying Parties in response
                                   to the SO
   (731) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties argue that "the Commission uses the
         example of NYSE Liffe's decision not to launch Euro-BTP Futures as evidence that both
   657
           See SO of 5 October 2011, section 2.2.2.7, paragraph 310.
   658
           See                  Eurex                     website,             available              at
           http://www.eurexchange.com/download/documents/publications/Factsheet_BTP.pdf, viewed on 20
           September 2011.
   659
           NYX internal document: Business Report to Euronext Supervisory Board – 30/11/2009 – Reference
           ENX-00463-00006.
EN                                                      168                                              EN

         Parties compete in launching and attracting liquidity in new products" and state that
         "the Parties struggle to understand the SO's point here, since the internal document
         quoted by the Commission clearly shows the opposite"660.
   (732) The Notifying Parties further consider that "this episode illustrates the phenomenon of
         liquidity in closely related contracts flowing inevitably to the incumbent exchange.
         Euro-BTP Futures were not a genuinely new product; they more closely related to
         existing Eurex contracts. NYSE Liffe understood this, realized it had no chance to win
         the business, and so did not try." 661
                                 11.2.1.4.3.3.3.         Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the
                                     SO
   (733) The Commission did not use this example in the SO, and is also not using it in this
         Decision, in the manner claimed by the Notifying Parties. Although it is perfectly
         possible that Eurex was better placed than Liffe to launch this new product, as the
         quoted document suggests, Liffe nonetheless considered doing so and could have done
         so. With appropriate support from market participants and measures to support
         liquidity, it might also have been successful, and it could still be successful if Eurex
         were, to use the expression adopted by one of its representatives at the Oral Hearing, to
         "take its eye off the ball".
   (734) Whilst the spread interest with Bund futures may indeed be a primary driver of the
         greater incentive for market participants to trade this product on Eurex, it is not the only
         consideration. Other factors may include offered margin offsets, where as outlined
         below in relation to closeness of competition (Section 11.2.1.4.3.5), Liffe is better
         placed than other exchanges; technology; market model; pricing; collateral rules;
         incentive programs etc: in other words all of the general factors which underlie
         potential competition.
   (735) That this new product inevitably would go to Eurex therefore seems an unrealistic
         assumption. If this were the case, it might be questioned why Euribor itself did not
         migrate to Eurex, since it is clearly better correlated with other euro interest rates than
         with the other products offered by Liffe. The Commission therefore interprets the
         quoted document in the more natural sense of Liffe's simply having determined that
         there was no interest, at that moment, for launch on whatever commercial terms it was
         willing or able to offer. Indeed, if the conclusion that the product "naturally" belonged
         to Eurex were as self-evident as the Notifying Parties appear to imply, it should be
         asked why Liffe considered launching it at all or felt it useful to consult customers on
         the matter.
   660
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 179.
   661
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 180.
EN                                                       169                                                EN

                             11.2.1.4.3.4.       Gilts
                             11.2.1.4.3.4.1. Competitive interaction
   (736) Another example where the Notifying Parties sought to challenge each other, in this
         case with Eurex as challenger, is in gilts (UK government bonds).662
   (737) A serious threat of entry from Eurex into gilts is clearly documented in the internal
         documents of NYX: "There is a threat from Eurex launching a gilt futures cont[r]act
         […]*.
   (738) NYX considered actions in response that "include […]*." Liffe argued that "although
         we are unlikely to be able to compete with Eurex on […]*, this is considered to be
         enough to secure customer goodwill"663.
   (739) An earlier document from December 2006 shows that NYX feared an "early bridgehead
         in London for Eurex Clearing" and anticipated initial launch of 10 and 30 year gilt
         futures, possibly followed by gilt options. The 30-year contract was not available on
         NYX. NYX anticipated a price advantage on the side of Eurex, a fee holiday and,
         significantly, refers explicitly to expected margin offset against the Bund, Bobl and
         Schatz, noting however that "gilt/short sterling margins will be at least as effective as
         Gilt/Bund margins". The same document refers to the move by Eurex having been
         subject to "probable encouragement by LIBA [the London Investment Bankers'
         Association, now incorporated into AFME]"664
   (740) Material from the Notifying Parties shows that NYX reduced the headline fee for gilts
         from […]* to […]*p by 2009 and also that average fees tended to fall over this
         period665.
                                  11.2.1.4.3.4.2.         Points made by the Notifying Parties in response
                                       to the SO
   (741) The response to the SO does not directly address the evidence brought by the
         Commission in relation to gilts, but is limited to three related points.
   (742) Firstly, the Notifying Parties state that "the SO … does not identify any issues in respect
         of competition between NYSE Liffe's and Eurex's LTIR contracts".
   (743) Secondly, the response to the SO refers to "the Commission's (at least implicit)
         understanding that … the CME's highly liquid U.S.-based LTIR derivatives are, for
         proprietary traders, much closer substitutes than NYSE Liffe's Gilt contracts for
   662
          See SO, paragraph 306.
   663
          NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, with title "Slides
          on risk profile high risk report , March 2007" – Reference ENX-00295-00001.
   664
          NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, with title
          "Product Review- Threats, Actions, Opportunities", 4 December 2006 – Reference ENX-00797-00001,
          slides 10 and 12.
   665
          Notifying Parties, response to the Commission's RFI of 8 August 2011.
EN                                                        170                                                   EN

         Eurex's Bund/Bobl/Schatz contracts."666 A similar claim is made in the Notifying
         Parties' submission of 1 December 2011667.
   (744) The Notifying Parties also contested the statement in the SO that launches by NYSE
         Liffe in the short and medium sterling rate space "may have been in response to a
         perceived threat from Eurex in this space"668, arguing that "there was no thinking on
         NYSE Liffe's Fixed Income desk that the launch of Short and Medium Gilts was in
         response to a potential threat from Eurex."669.
                                 11.2.1.4.3.4.3.         Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the
                                     SO
   (745) The first claim made by the Notifying Parties above is incorrect. Whilst there is indeed
         no actual overlap between euro LTIR and medium/long gilts, as set out in the preceding
         Sections there is certainly potential competition between the Notifying Parties for both
         sets of products owing, not least, to their position in the other.
   (746) In relation to the second claim regarding substitutability with US Treasury Futures, the
         Commission has no evidence pointing to such a conclusion, and has neither suggested
         this to be the case nor, even if it were, that this would be relevant to the competitive
         assessment, since fundamental factors of demand, that is to say the need to hedge and
         the views on the market which would determine the willingness to trade, would all be
         currency-specific.
   (747) In relation, finally, to the launch of the short and medium sterling products, the
         Commission accepts that the explanation given by the Notifying Parties may indeed be
         correct, since the documented threat from Eurex was in relation to longer-dated gilts
         with ten and thirty year maturity, although the reference by NYSE Liffe to margin
         offsets along the gilt curve being equally attractive to margin offsets with the Bund,
         Bobl and Schatz may well mean that this introduction also had the effect of
         strengthening Liffe's gilt franchise against the Eurex threat, even if this was not its
         primary intention.
   (748) It follows that the Notifying Parties have not brought evidence to alter the Commission's
         assessment in the SO that Eurex provides a competitive constraint to Liffe in respect of
         its UK gilt business.
                            11.2.1.4.3.5.       No other player could maintain sufficient competitive
                                 constraint on the merged entity post-merger
   (749) The examples in the previous sections illustrate the particularly close competitive
         interaction existing between Eurex and Liffe, be it for products where they are actual
         competitors or for products where one of them controls the bulk of the liquidity. Indeed,
         under the current constellation of European interest rate derivatives markets, Eurex and
   666
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 82.
   667
           Notifying Parties, "Briefing Paper on the Commitments proposed by the Parties", section "effective
           competition will remain in interest rate derivatives", p.4.
   668
           See SO, paragraph 307.
   669
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 176.
EN                                                        171                                                 EN

           Liffe are the only two relevant players between which every game in this space is
           decided. It follows that post-merger, it is unlikely that there would be any other player
           in a position to constrain the merged entity in a similar fashion to which Eurex and
           Liffe constrain each other pre-transaction.
   (750) The unique competitive dynamics between the Notifying Parties is related not only to
           their existing large margin pools of correlated risk (discussed also in Section
           11.2.1.7.1.2 below), but also to the fact that the Notifying Parties' membership bases
           (discussed in Section 11.2.1.7.1.4) overlap on a volume-weighted basis to a very large
           degree and are significantly different from those of other platforms. ICE qualifies this
           overlap, as regards members trading in interest rate futures, as "an almost exact
           match".670
   (751) The position of the Notifying Parties and their main (alleged) rivals is illustrated in
           summary form in Table 6 and developed further in the following Sections.
           Table 6: Interest Rate derivatives (options and futures) on European underlyings
                                   Yearly Volumes            Size of Margin Pool in               Significant European
                                   (in number of             relevant European                    membership base
                                   contracts)                underlyings
         DB                        828 million 671           Large                                Yes
         NYX                       588 million672            Large                                Yes
         CME                       2310673                   Very small                           No
         NASDAQ                    27 million674             Small                                No675
   Source: Commission's compilation of various sources for the volumes: Notifying Parties and third party information, and
   Commission assessment based on various sources (Notifying Parties and third party information) for the remaining columns.
                                  11.2.1.4.3.5.1.           CME
   (752) The Notifying Parties have throughout the procedure, and in particular in their Response
           to the SO, emphasised the competitive role of CME, having stated that it is "the Parties
           closest exchange competitor in LTIR and STIR"676 and that it will "continue to constrain
   670
            See reply to question 43 of Q10 – Questionnaire to Competitors, Phase II [...]*. Cf also Chi-X Europe,
            reply to question 46 of Q3 – Questionnaire to Competitors [...]*.
   671
            This      is    for     year     2010      –      Eurex       trading       statistics    at     http://deutsche-
            boerse.com/dbag/dispatch/en/kir/gdb_navigation/investor_relations/30_Reports_and_Figures/20_Curre
            nt_Trading_Statistics#par5 .
   672
            This is for year 2010 NYSE Liffe - Total Exchange Volume data provided on NYX website.
   673
            This is the total of the volume on CME, since Euribor was offered for trading and clearing on US
            platform up to 11 November 2011. See CME response to the Commission’s RFI of 14 November 2011
            [...]*.
   674
            This is for year 2010 and relates to interest rate derivatives on Swedish and Danish underlyings (only IR
            derivatives     on     European       underlyings),      taken      from        the     Nasdaq      website      :
            http://nordic.nasdaqomxtrader.com/newsstatistics/statisticsandreports/Derivatives/
   675
            Nordic countries only.
   676
            Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate Derivatives, Section III.B.
EN                                                          172                                                                EN

         the merged entity after the Transaction"677. Indeed, the Notifying Parties contend that
         "CME - and not each Party… is each party's most likely and credible challenger in an
         existing contract (evidenced, inter alia, by CME's recent introduction of Euribor
         contracts".
   (753) The Notifying Parties then cite derivatives based on US underlyings offered by CME –
         Eurodollar and Treasuries – as proof of this closeness of competition and competitive
         constraint. They also cite the recent launch of Euribor and the fact that there is a margin
         pool of correlated contracts with Eurodollar, and that CME has a similar membership
         base to the Notifying Parties'. Lastly they allege that CME is "aggressively marketing
         its Euribor product against NYSE Liffe" and that there is "broad consensus that despite
         the difficulties, the CME has the means to challenge the merged entity"678. They cite
         internal documents that would serve as "testimony of the constraint imposed by the
         CME", and make general claims regarding overall allocation of resources and the
         attempt by NYX and Eurex to enter the US markets as proof that competition is with
         CME and not between the Notifying Parties.
   (754) First, as outlined at Recitals (404) through (406), derivatives based on non-European
         underlyings do not compete to any significant extent with derivatives based on
         European underlyings and are therefore, as already indicated. outside the relevant
         market679.
   (755) Second, CME's Euribor offering concerns future contracts only, and not options. It was
         introduced by CME on 3 October 2011 and as of 11 November 2011, has only achieved
         2,310 Euribor contracts, a minuscule proportion. It has an open interest of 341 contracts
         on 2 December 2011680. CME has also stated that its "revenue derived from traded
         Euribor futures has been negligible to date"681. By way of comparison, Eurex had
         approximately 400 thousand contracts in 2009, 267,000 contracts in 2010, with an open
         interest in 2010 amounting to 26,000 contracts682. This compares with the open interest
         of 5.6 million contracts of Liffe just for STIR futures, as together with STIR options
         this would amount to approx. 23 million contracts, with a total volume of
         approximately 300 million contracts683.
   (756) As regards the margin pool of contracts, the Notifying Parties consider that CME
         heavily advertises the "significant margin offsets that traders of its US dollar based
   677
           Similar claims are made in "Briefing Paper on the Commitments proposed by the Parties", section
           "effective competition will remain in interest rate derivatives", p.4.
   678
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate Derivatives, Section III.B (e).
   679
           Certain traders, as outlined in the market definition section, may be "relatively indifferent" to the
           underlying in the sense that they seek trading opportunities across a range of derivatives products. Such
           traders seek profitable opportunities wherever they arise. Neither the Notifying Parties nor any other
           respondent to the market investigation has presented evidence to suggest that this group of traders is
           constrained in such a way that a decision to trade in one instrument necessarily implies a decision to
           trade less in any other.
   680
           CME group volume and open interest report - 9:00 pm preliminary report for business date: 12
           February 2011, published on its website. One Euribor contract corresponds to one million euros in
           notional value.
   681
           CME written observations to the SO, 31 October 2011, point 7 [...]*.
   682
           WFE 2010 Annual Statistics.
   683
           According to figures published on its website by NYX as the "NYSE Liffe European Derivatives
           Market Report - TOTAL EXCHANGE".
EN                                                        173                                                        EN

         products will enjoy when trading Euribor futures". However, they refer only to a
         screenshot of the CME website as evidence of this alleged "heavy advertising". No
         other evidence was provided by the Notifying Parties of such a heavy spend on
         advertising by CME. The Notifying Parties also cite […]*.
   (757) Furthermore, the cited web page makes reference to an offset "of up to 50 percent with
         Eurodollar and Treasury products". This is significantly lower as an offset than the
         Notifying Parties' offerings. As indicated above in relation to Gilts (see Recital (739)),
         the existence of a highly correlated margin pool is acknowledged by NYX as a
         significant competitive advantage to anyone wishing to enter the market. In this regard,
         it should be noted that LCH Clearnet offers [80-90]*% offset between short and
         medium gilts and [70-80]*% offset between long gilts and short sterling (the sterling
         equivalent of Euribor). LCH also offsets 3 month Euribor for [70-80]*% against the ten
         year Euro swapnote and offsets Euribor for [60-70]*% against long gilts684. It is
         therefore safe to assume that an offset of 75-80% would be possible between Euribor
         and the Schatz or Bobl (and indeed the Notifying Parties make similar assumptions in
         their submissions on potential efficiencies discussed below).
   (758) By contrast, offsets offered by CME with Eurodollar are only [50%]* and with US
         treasury futures in the range of [35-55%]* (and similar offsets are available for
         customers trading Eurodollar on Liffe). As such, the offsets between the Notifying
         Parties' respective products are significantly higher than those between these products
         and those of CME.
   (759) CME's offering would be attractive in particular to those customers that trade on US
         underlying derivative products as offsets are only offered with non-European (US)
         underlying derivatives. In stark contrast, the Notifying Parties have substantial activities
         in European underlying derivatives in the relevant markets under analysis and that are
         able to likely to offer margin offsets to European customers who trade all parts of the
         European interest rate curve, who are thus likely to obtain far greater offsets when they
         remain with the merged entity. The CME offering is therefore targeted at customers
         trading mainly in US underlying products that wish to complement their trading
         strategies with European products.
   (760) This is also demonstrated by the fact that, according to the CME, the matching for the
         Euribor future will occur on the matching engine located in Chicago. The value
         proposition of this contract is therefore, according to CME, associated with the margin
         efficiencies that customers that already trade on CME's platform can realize. As a
         result, the contract is principally attractive for existing CME US customers who have
         open interest in correlated products (such as Eurodollar) with CME.685 Indeed, the fees
         for trading in Euribor futures at CME are set in dollars686. This has been explicitly
         confirmed by CME itself, which stated that: "substantially all of the traded volume has
         originated from the US"687.
   684
           See the reply of the Notifying Parties to the Commission's second RFI of 13 September 2001, Annex
           12.
   685
           CME, minutes of a meeting on 1 September 2011, paragraph 5 [...]*.
   686
           http://www.cmegroup.com/trading/interest-rates/files/euribor-fees-programs.pdf.
   687
           CME written observations to the SO, 31 October 2011 [...]*.
EN                                                      174                                                  EN

   (761) In this context, CME has stated that it does not specifically target European customers
         of Liffe, and that its goal is not to shift the liquidity from Liffe but instead offer a
         complementary product to CME’s existing customers.688 Indeed, CME's Euribor
         contract "is a product that will be regulated by the CFTC as part of CME’s Designated
         Contract Market in the US"689. As ICAP states "CME's presence in Europe is limited
         and, in any event, it is mostly its US customers that are likely to be trading the CME
         Euribor contracts and CME does not have broad membership base in Europe"690.
   (762) Third, it should also be noted that clearing of Euribor contracts by CME is not carried
         out in Europe, but in the US. As regards the membership of CME, its clearing-house
         has a very reduced base of members, only 15 as of August 2011.
   (763) More generally, entry of trading platforms without an established position in Europe
         appears to be particularly difficult as concerns European equity and interest rate futures
         and options. Indeed, while entry in derivatives based on certain underlyings such as
         commodity derivatives seems to be possible as evidenced by successful entries into
         Europe by US exchanges (ICE, NASDAQ, CME etc.), no significant entry has occurred
         for European interest rate and equity futures and options. ICE explains this lack of
         significant entry by the narrower geographic scope of European interest rate, single
         equity and equity index derivatives: "European interest rate and equity derivatives are
         essentially traded in the European time zone as this is the time zone of the underlying
         asset. This is a constraint on the ability of US exchanges to become a significant player
         in European interest rate and equity derivatives."691 As shown above, derivatives in
         non-European underlyings are not substitutable and fall outside the relevant market.
   (764) CME also acknowledged during the market investigation that challenging the incumbent
         on the Euribor futures market is difficult "It is easy to offer trading, it is very difficult to
         displace an established, effective, efficient competitor that has substantial liquidity
         unless the new entrant can offer significant value proposition that cannot be or is not
         matched by the incumbent."692
   (765) Fourth, reference was also made during the Oral Hearing as well as in the Response to
         the SO to the fact that the headcount in Europe of CME has increased significantly, so
         that according to the Notifying Parties it is over 200. The Notifying Parties seem to
         imply that CME is investing heavily in expansion into the European interest rate
         derivatives concerned by this Decision. However, according to public information
         available at the CME website dating from March 2011, the initial focus of the activity
         of CME in Europe "will be on commodity products – energy, metals and agricultural –
         we aim to introduce clearing for OTC financial derivatives, beginning with interest rate
         swaps, in parallel with the deepening of the commodity clearing"693. At its most recent
         analyst meeting, relied upon the Notifying Parties to demonstrate that CME is
   688
           CME, Minutes of a meeting on 1 September 2011, point 6 [...]*.
   689
           CME, minutes of a meeting on 1 September 2011, point 7 […]*.
   690
           ICAP, Observations on the SO issued in case M.6166 Deutsche Börse/ NYSE Euronext submitted
           pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011[...]*.
   691
           ICE, response to question 64 of Q3 - Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   692
           CME, response to question 23 of Q3 – Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   693
           Press     release      of      CME      clearing     Europe      of       March  15, 2011    at
           http://cmegroup.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=43&item=3124&pagetemplate=article.
EN                                                       175                                               EN

         expanding its presence in Europe, that Commission notes that this expansion is being
         driven via the setting up of CME clearing Europe (which does not clear Euribor
         contracts) and of its "FX and Metals businesses" that are "led from London, the global
         financial center for these business lines". No reference is made to Euribor futures
         throughout the presentation694. CME Europe clearing is described as executing "OTC
         Clearing" (see Recital (762)), and hence does not relate to the products concerned by
         this Decision.
   (766) Fifth, in terms of the market investigation, the significant majority of customers, when
         asked whether they would consider trading Euribor on CME, answered that they have
         no plans to do so695. The Notifying Parties' alleged "broad consensus" as to CME
         having the means to challenge the merged entity relies not only on some very general
         remarks made by some customers (not in reference to the relevant markets under
         analysis but made in general terms not referring specifically to European underlyings),
         but also on a clear minority of customers as well as trading platforms that make such
         statements as clearly set out in Recitals (559) and (558) respectively.
   (767) Most customers and competitors, to the extent they expressed a view, considered that
         CME has little realistic chance to capture significant market share in the contract, and
         that it would only achieve volumes if there was large scale support from market makers,
         or conceivably limited to US traders which are their members but not members of
         Liffe.696 As one reply to the second phase market investigation put it: "History has
         shown that it is very difficult to shift liquidity from one exchange to another. Liffe
         launched the Eurodollar contract in direct competition to the CME but has not made
         any significant headway. Eurex launched in the US but was unable to gain any
         footprint."697
   (768) Other respondents also mentioned liquidity as the key factor for success or failure. [One
         large customer]*, for instance stated that although "CME has the potential to be Eurex’s
         / Liffe’s main competitor due to customer base connectivity, business profile, skill set &
         apparent European entry strategy …, this will not be easy due to the strength of the
         existing liquidity pools at the incumbents".698 ICAP stated: "CME has the platform and
         deep pockets to make it credible. They will start at a disadvantage to, say, Eurex (who
         have attempted to poach the Euribor contract) because their distribution across euro
         players is more restricted (ie only to those that also trade US CME products)."699 "They
         (CME) will still start a long way behind Liffe (or Eurex) however, and they will be
         required to devote considerable financial resource to the cause if they are to make any
         impact at all."700
   694
           CME          Group       Analyst       Day      2011,      4        October      2011         found at
           http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/CME/1551552047x0x505208/9ec7cd62-744f-47eb-acfd-
           202685364d07/CME%20Group%202011%20Analyst%20Day%2010_4_11%207AM%20FINAL.pdf.
   695
           Responses to question 76 of Questionnaire Q8 – Questionnaire to customers – phase II. Question asked:
           "In relation to CME's plans to launch Euribor futures in autumn 2011, please explain whether you will
           consider trading this contract with CME and under what circumstances".
   696
           See responses to question 77 of Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II and Q.61 of Q10 –
           Questionnaire to Competitors, Phase II.
   697
           BGC, reply to question 77 of questionnaire Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II [...]*.
   698
           [...]*, Reply to question 78 of questionnaire Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II [...]*.
   699
           ICAP, Reply to question 77 of questionnaire Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II [...]*.
   700
           ICAP, Reply to question 78 of questionnaire Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II [...]*.
EN                                                        176                                                     EN

   (769) In this respect, Chi-X Europe expressed the view that CME is unlikely to be successful
         in the absence of an adequate margin pool in Europe. "CXE considers it very unlikely
         that CME or other derivative exchanges or clearing houses will be successful in
         Europe. CME Europe and ICE Clear Europe would need to offer margin synergies with
         the open interest they manage in the US. CXE considers that such cross jurisdictional
         benefits are very hard to realise because of the different underlying regulatory and
         legal environments and bankruptcy laws. Without these, CXE consider that it is difficult
         to see why any existing European exchange would send them their trade feeds to clear
         or why the OTC market would use them in preference to the CCP managing their
         exchange traded open interest."701
   (770) Nasdaq OMX summarizes this as follows: "Importantly, Euribor futures traded on
         CME will be cleared in the US, most likely because CME has very few customers in
         Europe whereas in the US it has a broad customer base. European investors would not
         trade European derivatives on another exchange where liquidity is much lower than on
         the incumbent even it was a European exchange, let alone a US exchange with US
         clearing. Since CME consequently does not compete with Liffe for trading of Euribor
         futures by European investors, the proposed merger will not impact CME’s ability to
         attract liquidity in Euribor futures from European investors. CME does not have the
         potential for that irrespective of the proposed merger."702
   (771) LSE has a similar view: "CME has no credible clearing pool in Europe – therefore no
         ability to build business and products completing on innovation; CME does not have a
         competing product that competes with any of the existing key Eurex or LIFFE products.
         Therefore as CME has no clearing pool in Europe it is highly unlikely that it can build
         a credible business in Europe. In a post-merger scenario, it would be even harder for
         CME to enter the market as the long and short end of the curve will be held by Eurex
         Clearing".703
   (772) Indeed, even the CME Group itself is modest in relation to any success it expects to
         have with its offering of Euribor futures, implicitly echoing a similar analysis to that
         furnished by Nasdaq OMX: "CME hopes to provide its existing customers with a
         competitive and diverse product set. Trading Euribors on CME would offer CME
         customers the opportunity to trade Euribors with the benefits of margin offsets against
         Eurodollar contracts and operational efficiencies of trading Euribor, Eurodollar and
         FX futures on a single platform (Globex). In addition, it would provide these
         efficiencies for those clients who trade our highly liquid Eurodollar options products.
         [...]*."704
   (773) As regards the internal documents cited by the Notifying Parties, these actually show,
         contrary to what the Notifying Parties contend, that the Notifying Parties themselves
         accept that chances of success of CME "are small"705.
   701
           Chi-X Europe response to question 69 of Q3- Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   702
           Nasdaq OMX, reply to question 61 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, phase II [...]*.
   703
           LSE, reply to question 61 of Q10– Questionnaire to competitors, phase II, [...]*.
   704
           Nasdaq OMX, reply to question 61 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, phase II [...]*.
   705
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate Derivatives, paragraph 121 citing NYC document
           ENX-00254-00001.
EN                                                      177                                                    EN

   (774) In this regard, Liffe evaluates [CME's potential threat is lower]*.706 In another internal
         analysis document, NYX considers that [in the circumstances of the time, an attack
         would likely be unsuccessful]*707
   (775) Similarly, an NYX internal document assessing competitive threats stating with respect
         to CME: [the threat posed by CME is low to moderate, and it should not be
         underestimated]*708
   (776) In another internal document, NYX analyses the likelihood of CME successfully
         entering STIR derivatives (Euribor) as follows:
                          [Potential attack from Chicago is not likely]*[Concentrated liquidity
                         makes the attack very challenging]*[Moving liquidity away from Europe is
                         difficult in the current political regulatory sistuation]*709.
   (777) In another internal document, again in the context of the possible entry of CME into
         offering European STIR products, NYX considers that […]*.710
   (778) [Discussion of CME brand positioning]*.711
   (779) In conclusion, whilst CME may succeed in occupying a niche position in European
         interest rate futures and options which serves the needs of a certain but small group of
         customers, it is not nearly as well placed to compete with the merged entity as the
         Notifying Parties are placed to compete with each other at present owing, amongst all
         the factors set out above, to the fact that it does not possess a similarly large and highly
         correlated margin pool allowing traders to offset positions taken along the European
         interest rate curve. In view of its limited position in this space, it is unlikely that CME
         would be in a position to exert a credible competitive pressure to the merged entity
         post-transaction.
                                 11.2.1.4.3.5.2.         Nasdaq OMX
   (780) The Notifying Parties referred in a number of instances throughout the procedure to
         Nasdaq OMX as a "European exchange that could credibly launch interest rate
         derivatives in competition with the Parties is Nasdaq OMX. Nasdaq OMX has extensive
         experience in setting up and operating derivatives market and existing European
         infrastructure in Stockholm, from which it could expand into other products"712 and that
   706
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, with title
           "Project Blackhawk", 27.04.2010, Reference ENX-00871 -00005, .[although unlikely, the impact of an
           attack could be high]*.
   707
           See NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Project
           Blackhawk – Fixed Income derivatives, no exact date available (around May 2009), Reference ENX-
           00063 -00001, p. 5.
   708
           See NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, E-Mail of
           15th July 2010 of […]* to ,[…]*, Subject: Competitive Threats – updated.
   709
           See NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Project
           Blackhawk – Fixed Income derivatives, no exact date available (around May 2009), p.3.
   710
           See NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Project
           Blackhawk – Fixed Income derivatives, no exact date available (around May 2009), Reference ENX-
           00063 -00001, p. 5.
   711
           German original quotes: .[…]*.
   712
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate Derivatives, paragraph 135.
EN                                                        178                                                 EN

         "Nasdaq OMX plans to offer the same interest rate products as NYSE Liffe in Europe,
         cleared at LCH.Clearnet"713.
   (781) Nasdaq OMX confirmed that it had "over the years… continuously analyzed the
         possibility of launching competing offerings, and it is currently in such a process to
         explore the opportunity of launching in 2012 together with ••• clearinghouse LCH.
         Clearnet a new electronic marketplace for exchange traded interest rate derivatives
         based in London (the "NLX project "). According to Nasdaq OMX, such plans were
         elaborated before the announcement of the notified transaction. Nasdaq OMX however
         stated that "[i]t is clear from discussions with the dealers that they would like to see
         competition in European derivatives, but since the announcement of the merger
         between DB and NYSE Euronext, the dealers are expressing to NASDAQ OMX
         skepticism that competition would be possible after the NYSE Euronext and DB merger,
         as the already very high barriers to entry may become insurmountable."
   (782) Nasdaq OMX specified, however, that dealers have " indicated that they want to see
         copycat products on the platform rather than different products from those of the
         incumbents" and have "also pushed for fungibility with the underlying products, which
         cannot be offered due to current and potential future restrictions from Eurex and
         Liffe."714
   (783) Therefore, whilst Nasdaq OMX explored the possibility of offering euro LTIR and
         STIR in competition with Eurex and NYX, it has taken no definitive decision as yet:
         "NASDAQ OMX would like to proceed with the launch of the NLX platform, but it is
         reliant on customer support both to start the platform as well as help it to grow and
         there is serious concern that the already high barriers to entry would become
         insurmountable if the merger were allowed to proceed. Following a potential launch of
         the NLX project numerous other substantial barriers, challenges and uncertainties
         would have to be overcome or resolved, i.e. inter alia, pending regulatory reform,
         needed regulatory clearance, and adequate customer support."
   (784) There is therefore considerable uncertainty as to whether Nasdaq OMX will launch euro
         interest rate derivatives in competition with the Notifying Parties at all, much less with
         any degree of success.
   (785) Later in the procedure, in the context of the remedies offered, the Notifying Parties
         argued that the Commission in the SO "completely ignores" Nasdaq OMX, "even
         though it offers … STIR contracts on a European underlying (the Stockholm Interbank
         Offered Rate, STIBOR)".715
   (786) Although the Commission already noted, for instance at Recital (751), Nasdaq OMX's
         offering of money market derivatives based on Swedish krona, there is no evidence,
         whether from the market investigation or brought by the Notifying Parties, that these
         products are ever used by market participants who wish to gain exposure to euro (or
         sterling) rates and therefore would constrain the Notifying Parties either at present or in
   713
          Notifying Parties, Presentation at the Oral Hearing, 27 October 2011, Slide 50.
   714
          Nasdaq OMX, Response to the RFI of 14 November 2011, question 6 […]*.
   715
          Notifying Parties, Submission of 1 December 2011, "Effective Competition Will Remain In Interest
          Rate Derivatives".
EN                                                      179                                                EN

         the future. Even if this were the case, Eurex's offering of Euribor derivatives would
         clearly constitute a closer substitute.
   (787) As regards the margin pool related to Swedish krona, whilst the contracts in question
         may be correlated with Euribor derivatives, the pool itself is much smaller than the
         interest rate margin pool of either Party presently and a fortiori of the margin pool
         which the combined entity would control post-merger716. Opportunities for offsets
         against this margin pool would therefore also be very limited in scope even if Nasdaq
         OMX were to launch a competing Euribor product.
   (788) All these factors taken together mean that Nasdaq OMX's entry into those interest rates
         derivatives in European underlyings where the Notifying Parties are currently active
         cannot be considered by the Commission as sufficiently likely, timely and of sufficient
         scale to pose a competitive constraint on the merged entity.
                                   11.2.1.4.3.5.3.         ELX
   (789) The Notifying Parties have also frequently referred to ELX, a US futures exchange, as
         an example of a credible potential entrant into interest rate derivatives based on
         European underlyings. The Notifying Parties state that ELX has "announced its
         intention to introduce European interest rate products in competition with NYSE Liffe
         and Eurex"717. In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties have considered it to
         be one of the "major competitorsfurther described as a "success" which "demonstrates
         the ability of the Parties' customers to switch liquidity"718. According to the Notifying
         Parties, ELX will launch Bund, Bobl and Schatz futures Euribor futures and given that
         it already offers U.S. based Eurodollar futures, it "may thus be able to offer cross-
         margining opportunities to traders that trade all three products on ELX, resulting in
         cross-margining opportunities that may well exceed those that the Parties can offer".
   (790) ELX has confirmed that it has "been recently exploring new opportunities and invested
         some resources to evaluate the possibility to start trading Euribor, Gilt, Bund, Bobl and
         Schatz futures on its US platform".
   (791) However, according to ELX, its aim is not to target European-based investors, but to
         "target US customers", so it would have its matching engine based in the US and the
         contracts would be cleared with OCC in the US. Thus, according to ELX, there is no
         intention to have a trading or clearing platform in Europe. Any cross-margining
         opportunities that might arise would thus be for US based traders.
   (792) In this context, ELX's very limited market share even for products based on US
         underlyings should be highlighted. In this regard, ELX has specified that "for trading
         interest rate derivative contracts, namely US Treasury interest rate products and
         Eurodollar contracts... it has market share of around 1-2% in the US"719. ELX has
         explained this limited market presence by the fact that "margin requirements at
   716
           Trading volumes in interest rates on NASDAQ OMX are less than 5% of the volume traded on Liffe in
           interest rates, and less than 2% of that of the merged entity (2010 figures).
   717
           Form CO, paragraph 8.56.
   718
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate Derivatives, paragraph 103.
   719
           ELX, agreed minutes of a conference call of 18 November 2011, paragraph 2 [...]*.
EN                                                         180                                               EN

         separate clearinghouses for offsetting or risk reducing positions requires additional
         capital than clearing at one clearinghouse" as well as "the inability to transfer
         offsetting positions across clearinghouses creates a risk of execution slippage as well
         as additional execution fees and commissions"720. This is in line with the Commission's
         conclusions on the existence of strong entry barriers in these markets (see Section
         11.2.1.7 below).
   (793) Lastly, as regards interest rate derivative products based on European underlyings, ELX
         has set a "hypothetical launch date in the early part of the second quarter of 2012".
         However, this is not a definitive decision: "The outcome of this analysis has been that it
         is more unlikely than likely that ELX would launch these contracts".721 There is
         therefore even uncertainty as to whether ELX will even launch such instruments for US
         clients.
   (794) These factors taken together mean that ELX's entry into interest rate derivatives in
         European underlyings cannot be considered by the Commission as sufficiently likely,
         timely and of sufficient scale to pose a competitive constraint on the merged entity.
                              11.2.1.4.3.5.4.          Other attempts at entry
   (795) The Project Rainbow initiative, described below in Section 11.2.1.7.2.1, also focused on
         an attempt to challenge Liffe in European interest rates. The main reason for this failure
         appears to have been that LCH Clearnet, […]*, declined to offer margin offset for
         Rainbow trading with the existing Liffe products on its platform.
   (796) The Notifying Parties also at a certain point in the proceedings drew attention to the bid
         announced on 2 September 2011 by LSE for LCH Clearnet, arguing that this might
         constitute a basis for the LSE to mount an attack on their interest rate franchise.
   (797) The Commission considers that any prospect of entry as a result of this bid is presently
         speculative and does not meet the criteria of likeliness and timeliness set out at
         paragraphs 68ff of the Horizontal Merger Guidelines. Firstly, there is no certainty that
         this planned acquisition will succeed. Secondly, the Notifying Parties have not
         indicated on what basis they believe such a threat would be more credible than
         presently, nor presented any evidence or arguments as to why this threat would become
         more credible as a result of the acquisition, that is to say why LCH would be impeded
         from acting, under existing ownership, from the way it would be assumed to act as a
         result of the acquisition. Nonetheless, if LCH possessed some asset such as its pool of
         open interest in interest rate swaps which might permit it to enable a competitor to
         mount an attack on the Notifying Parties' existing franchises – especially those of Eurex
         which is not even a customer of LCH – it presumably would have done so already and
         project Rainbow would not have failed.
   (798) Accordingly, it is concluded that there is no prospect of likely, timely and sufficient
         entry as a result of the negotiations in which LSE is engaged with a view to acquiring
         control of LCH Clearnet.
   720
           ELX, Response to Commission's RFI of 14 November 2011 [...]*.
   721
           ELX, agreed minutes of a conference call of 18 November 2011, paragraph 3 [...]*.
EN                                                     181                                          EN

                               11.2.1.4.3.5.5.        Conclusions
   (799) Therefore, the Commission considers it unlikely that any established derivatives
         exchange and CME in particular could gain meaningful presence in European interest
         rate futures and options in the absence of a built up margin pool of correlated European
         contracts. It follows that none of these players would be in a position to discipline the
         merged entity post-merger.
                           11.2.1.4.3.6.     Conclusion on potential competition in European interest
                               rate derivatives
   (800) The various episodes outlined in this Section illustrate the close competitive dynamics
         prevailing between the Notifying Parties in the area of European interest rate futures
         and options. In particular, these examples illustrate that Eurex and Liffe are each other's
         closest potential competitors in this space as they uniquely placed to challenge each
         other's franchises while there are no other players that would be able to maintain a
         sufficient competitive constraint on the merged entity post-transaction. In this respect,
         the main source of potential competitive threat in exchange-traded European interest
         rate futures and options primarily involves competition between Eurex and Liffe, with
         no comparable constraint emanating from any other platforms. It follows that the
         notified transaction will eliminate this close potential competition relationship between
         the Notifying Parties resulting in a market structure where the merged entity's
         behaviour will remain unchallenged.722
   11.2.1.4.4. Competition to introduce new products in the area of European
       interest rate derivatives
                           11.2.1.4.4.1.     Introduction
   (801) Eurex and Liffe also compete closely when it comes to the introduction of new products
         in the area of European interest rate derivatives. Indeed, numerous replies to the market
         investigation indicated that, even if major new product launches occur infrequently,
         innovation continues to be an important theme within the overall area of European
         interest rates derivatives.
   (802) In this context, it should be noted that this type of competition occurs in a broader space
         encompassing all European interest rate derivatives and therefore the question of
         whether the market should be further subdivided into STIR and LTIR derivatives is not
         relevant since it does not change the analysis.
   (803) In respect of innovation in European interest rate derivatives, NASDAQ OMX states
         that "Fixed income would see the development in new products as a consequence of
         EMIR and MIFID II. For debt and credit related products … Basel III will influence
         product evolution starting with a push towards clearing to lighten the banks' balance
         sheets. Once cleared, suitable contracts may experience increased liquidity and further
         need for additional transparency that eventually would make them suitable for
   722
           See Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 60.
EN                                                    182                                             EN

         exchange trading". CME stated that: "We believe that innovation will occur in all asset
         classes over time. We cannot anticipate where and in what form it will occur in the
         near term." TOM stated that: "Innovation is likely to take place in respect of single
         stock options, index products, futures, interest rate products, currency and commodity
         options." 723 The Warsaw Stock Exchange stated that: "Exchanges evolve constantly
         and that may result in introduction of completely new instruments as well as those
         similar to already traded products." 724
   (804) Amongst customers, [one large customer]* stated "Given uncertainty of the regulatory
         environment (EMIR) and how it will impact end users, it is difficult to project how
         exchanges will respond, adapt or innovate. That said as soon as the regulatory impacts
         become more clear, [...]* expects the exchanges to innovate. This may be done to
         protect their existing products or to gain access to new clients." [Another large
         customer]* states: "Innovation in new ‘similar’ contracts of the same families as
         existing contracts will continue, however there is likely to be an increase in new classes
         of derivatives, for example based on OTC derivative contracts".725
                             11.2.1.4.4.2.     Competition between the Notifying Parties
   (805) Although some of the more important illustrations of past competition between the
         Notifying Parties in respect of major new product launches have been provided above,
         in this regard it should also be recalled that, as argued in Section 11.2.1.2.5 above, in
         the words of LSE "innovation takes place on various bases, not just the creation of
         entirely new products. There can also be innovation in terms of, for example, product
         quality, price or market environment."726
   (806) Indeed, to take just one example of more incremental innovations, the notices section of
         NYX Global Derivatives website contains approximately monthly updates on various
         terms relating to trading Euribor. One important recent change was to the trade
         matching algorithm, introduced by London Notice 2908 in July 2007727 and later
         updated by London Notice 3292 of 11 June 2010728. NYX states the goal of this
         innovation as "to increase opportunities for traders who add liquidity to the market"729.
   (807) Indeed, the Notifying Parties' otherwise largely identical Euribor offerings differ in
         precisely this respect, since on Liffe, the "central order book applies a time pro-rata
         trade matching algorithm, but with priority given to the first order at the best price
   723
           Nasdaq OMX, CME, TOM, replies to question 72 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase II
           [...]*.
   724
           Warsaw Stock Exchange, reply to question 98 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase I [...]*.
   725
           […]*, replies to question 98 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase I [...]*.
   726
           LSEG's response to market testing of commitments, paragraph 3.6(a), [...]*.
   727
           NYX                             website,                            avaialbe                    at
           http://globalderivatives.nyx.com/sites/globalderivatives.nyx.com/files/226413.pdf, viewed on 29
           November 2011, London Notice 2908.
   728
           NYX                             website,                           available                    at
           http://globalderivatives.nyx.com/sites/globalderivatives.nyx.com/files/577758.pdf, viewed on 29
           November 2011, London Notice 3292.
   729
           NYX                             website,                           available                    at
           http://globalderivatives.nyx.com/sites/globalderivatives.nyx.com/files/226413.pdf, viewed on 29
           November 2011, London Notice 2908, paragraph 1.2.
EN                                                       183                                                  EN

         subject to a minimum order volume and limited to a maximum volume cap"730 whilst on
         Eurex, "orders and quotes are matched according to the principle of pro rata matching,
         which is exclusively based on the principle of price priority."731
   (808) As the Notifying Parties' arguments in this regard have already been dealt with in
         Section 11.2.1.3.3.4 above, the same arguments apply.
   (809) In conclusion, the Notifying Parties compete in product innovation in European interest
         rate derivatives, both by designing new products adjacent to their existing offerings and
         by upgrading these offerings in order to stay ahead of potential competition. In this
         regard, they are each other's closest competitor for the same reasons as this was
         concluded in respect of potential competition in the preceding Section, since success in
         new product innovation in this space depends on exactly the same factors as those
         allowing an exchange to act as a potential competitor. This competition would be lost
         as a result of the notified transaction.
                            11.2.1.4.4.3.       Arguments made by the Notifying Parties in response to the
                                 SO
   (810) In addition to the general points made by the Notifying Parties in respect of product
         innovation and discussed at Section 11.2.1.2.5 and 11.2.1.3.3 above, the SO outlined
         that many of the innovations in question have served to test new concepts which might
         have better met market needs, and cannot be dismissed as mere "me-too" innovation
         (although this also serves an important role in disciplining prices). The SO
         provisionally concluded that the pressure to preserve a product portfolio which meets
         market needs would be considerably lessened in the absence of such competition, since
         this type of innovation would risk cannibalizing existing franchises and therefore would
         be much less likely to be carried without the competitive constraint that exists today.
   (811) In response to this point in the SO, the Notifying Parties argue that "the main pressure
         to preserve a product portfolio that meets the market's needs comes from the Parties'
         strong and powerful customers and their ability to switch liquidity to any other existing
         or start-up exchange if they do not see their current needs met."732
   (812) The Commission considers that the examples given provide considerable evidence,
         however, that, to the extent that customers have any such role, this has primarily
         depended on the pre-merger competition described between the Notifying Parties. This
         point is taken up again in Section 11.2.1.8 on buyer power below.
   730
           Euronext                            website,                          available                    at
           http://www.euronext.com/trader/contractspecifications/derivative/wide/contractspecifications-3657-
           EN.html?euronextCode=I-LON-FUT, viewed on 29 November 2011.
   731
           Eurex website, available at http://www.eurexchange.com/trading/products/INT/MON/FEU3_en.html,
           viewed on 29 November 2011.
   732
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Interest Rate derivatives, paragraph 186.
EN                                                       184                                                     EN

                             11.2.1.4.4.4.       Conclusion
   (813) It follows that the notified transaction would eliminate competition between the
          Notifying Parties as concerns the introduction of new products in the area of European
          interest rate derivatives, where they are currently each other's closest competitor.
   11.2.1.4.5.      Conclusion on European interest rate derivatives
   (814) As explained and illustrated in this Section, Eurex and Liffe are the only significant
          players and each other's closest actual and potential competitors in the area of European
          interest rate derivatives as concerns both existing and new products. The notified
          transaction eliminates this significant competitive constraint that Liffe and Eurex
          currently exert upon each other in this space and constitutes a merger to near-monopoly
          irrespective of whether the market should be further subdivided into STIR and LTIR
          derivatives or according to the currency. Following the transaction, derivatives users
          trading European interest rate derivatives will see their choice of platforms significantly
          reduced which is likely to lead to higher exchange fees and less innovation.
       11.2.1.5.COMPETITION BETWEEN THE NOTIFYING PARTIES - SINGLE STOCK EQUITY OPTIONS
                 AND FUTURES
                        11.2.1.5.1. Introduction
   (815) From the outset it should be recalled that this assessment applies for both groups of
          customers identified in the market definition Section of this Decision, namely the
          customers that trade only ETDs and the customers that trade both ETDs and OTC
          derivatives. This is because, as explained in Recital (425) of this Decision, even for
          customers for whom ETD lookalikes could possibly be an alternative under certain
          circumstances, the phenomenon of ETD lookalikes in the area of single stock equity
          derivatives is of minimal importance and therefore not of a nature to alter competitive
          assessment in this case.
                        11.2.1.5.2. Actual competition in existing products
                             11.2.1.5.2.1.       "Home" markets
   (816) The Notifying Parties currently compete for a wide range of existing European single
          stock equity futures and options. The overlaps are particularly significant in their
          respective "home" markets, namely Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Portugal and the
          UK for Liffe and Germany and Switzerland for Eurex.
   (817) Eurex offers 985 European single stock futures on its order book and 430 single stock
          options. It also offers 133 dividend futures (six of these are equity index dividend
          futures) and a single dividend option on Eurostoxx 50 dividend futures.733
   733
            Notifying Parties' reply to the second RFI of September 13, of 19 September 2011, annex 4.
EN                                                        185                                          EN

   (818) Liffe's equity order book portfolio is less extensive than that of Eurex: it offers 291
         single stock options and 148 single stock futures based on shares of European
         companies.
   (819) As concerns the overlaps in their respective home markets, Liffe offers on its order
         book 19 German and 8 Swiss single equity futures, though no single equity options.
         Eurex, in turn, offers stock options and futures on its order book on blue chips on all the
         Euronext "home" markets, namely Belgium, France, Netherlands, Portugal and UK. In
         this respect, the market investigation showed that the Notifying Parties compete head-
         to-head in trading in a significant range of European single stock options and futures734.
   (820) In terms of revenues, the Notifying Parties are once again closely balanced, with Liffe
         realizing Euro […]* in 2010 and Eurex Euro […]*735.
   (821) As regards all overlaps in their order books, Eurex and Liffe offer in competition with
         each other trading in 184 European single stock options and 111 single stock futures.
         The overlap of the Notifying Parties' order books represents 75% of all single stock
         futures on Liffe and 11.5% of all on Eurex. For options, it represents 63% of Liffe's
         portfolio, and 43% of that of Eurex.
   (822) In addition, across the range of instruments available to be brought on exchange but
         which cannot be traded on the order book of both Parties, they overlap in 444 single
         stock options and 774 single stock futures736.
   (823) The overlap on the order book therefore represents 75% of all single stock futures on
         Liffe and 11.5% of all on Eurex. For options, it represents 63% of Liffe's portfolio, and
         43% of that of Eurex.
   (824) On the overall market for European single-stock equity derivatives, the combined
         market shares of the Notifying Parties would reach levels close to [90-100%]*. Should
         the market for European single stock derivatives be subdivided between options and
         futures, then the combined market shares of the Notifying Parties would reach levels
         higher than [80-90%]*. Indeed, for the period Jan-May 2011, DB accounted for [50-
         60%]* of all exchange trading of single stock options in the EEA, with NYX
         representing a further [30-40%]*: meaning the Notifying Parties would represent [80-
         90%]* in total. In European single stock futures, DB represented [40-50%]* and NYX
         [40-50%]* of the EEA total: a combined total of [90-100%]*737.
   (825) Should the European single stock derivatives markets be subdivided according to the
         country of underlying stock, the Notifying Parties' market shares in their core "home"
         markets of Germany, Switzerland, the UK, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and
         Portugal would in almost all cases be 100%, with important overlaps in a number of
   734
           AFME, Minutes of a meeting of 24 August 2011 [...]*.
   735
           Form CO, Annexes D.18 and D.19.
   736
           Annex 4 to the Notifying Parties' reply of 19 September 2011.
   737
           World Federation of Exchanges, as provided by AFME, Annex to their reply to Q1 – Questionnaire to
           customers – paragraph2.7. […]*.
EN                                                       186                                                 EN

         individual stocks, in particular the larger and more liquid internationally traded blue
         chips. 738
   (826) In futures and options taken together, the picture is as follows739:
         Table 7: Market shares of the Notifying Parties in single stock derivatives (futures
         and options) per country, 2010
   Country of underlying stock                 NYSE Liffe            Eurex                Combined
   Belgium                                     [90-100%]*            [5-10%]*             [90-100%]*
   France                                      [70-80%]*             [20-30%]*            [90-100%]*
   Germany                                     [20-30%]*             [70-80%]*            [90-100%]*
   Netherlands                                 [90-100%]*            [5-10%]*             [90-100%]*
   Portugal                                    [90-100%]*            [5-10%]*             [90-100%]*
   UK                                          [90-100%]*            [0-5%]*              [90-100%]*
         Source: Commission's calculations based on the Notifying Parties' Response to the SO740.
   (827) The extent of overlap between Eurex and Liffe in these markets is significant. In this
         respect, Nasdaq OMX notes that "Eurex offers derivatives on all single stocks that are
         covered by the Euro Stoxx 600 equity index, which contains large, mid and small
         capitalisation companies from a number of different countries. To the extent other
         derivatives exchanges, including Liffe but also other derivatives exchanges in Europe,
         offer derivatives contracts on the relevant single stocks, Eurex competes with such
         exchanges. Likewise Liffe does not only offer derivatives on single stock listed on any of
         the equities exchanges operated by Nyse Euronext in the EEA but also derivatives on
         single stock listed on other equities exchanges in the EEA, and in this respect competes
         with other derivatives exchanges, most notably the respective incumbents. That said,
         the incumbent has a competitive edge because it normally provides a tighter bid-ask
         spread due to high liquidity on its platform and can therefore charge relatively higher
         fees compared to competitors as these are offset from the perspective of customers by
         lower implicit trading costs (as well as margin benefits)"741.
   (828) Similarly, ICE states that "there are a number of overlap products where Eurex and
         Liffe compete head-to-head, both offering seemingly identical options based on the
         shares of a number of leading international companies in a variety of sectors, eg
         Aegon, Ahold, Air France, AkzoNobel, BNP Paribas, Credit Suisse, Dexia, ING,
   738
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity section, paragraph 40. Figures by contracts traded
           2010. Omission of Switzerland is due to the Notifying Parties.
   739
           The Notifying Parties initially provided figures conflated by off-order book trades. These figures were
           therefore adjusted to reflect on-order book only.
   740
           See Notifying Parties' Response to the SO, paragraph 40.
   741
           Nasdaq OMX, reply to question 44 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, phase II [...]*.
EN                                                         187                                                     EN

         Philips, Randstad and Unilever. Eurex competes with Liffe's single stock equity
         derivatives… with some success".742
   (829) Again, the internal documents of the Notifying Parties are testimony to the head-to-head
         competition in the area of European single stock options. Indeed, in the period from
         2006 to 2009 NYX closely monitored the introduction by DB of single stock options in
         particular in France, the Netherlands and the UK as can be verified by the significant
         number of documents analysed by the Board of Liffe tracking these events.743 DB
         documents clearly show that when targeting the introduction of these products, it
         compares itself directly with the Liffe offering.744 NYX itself clearly acknowledges the
         extent of this competition: "The listed equity derivatives war in Europe is fought
         between NYX and Eurex, with the latter having a bigger market share due in part of the
         gravitational effect of Eurex's giant Eurostoxx index contract"745.
   (830) Should the market be subdivided according to the underlying stock, the extent of the
         head-to-head competition between the Notifying Parties is illustrated in Tables 8 to 10,
         which relate to June 2011.746 Eurex competes head-to-head with Liffe, on order book,
         for trading in futures on […]* equity underlyings with cash (and derivative) listings on
         Euronext's home markets: […]* Belgian, […]* Dutch, […]* French and […]*
         Portuguese. It can be seen in table 8 below that Eurex frequently achieves significant
         volumes in these instruments, while in nine cases, it has more than half the liquidity.
         Table 8: Market shares of the Notifying Parties in futures on single stocks (NYX
         home markets)
       Country           Underlying                             Volume      NYX           DB1
       Belgium           Inbev NV                                  537186        92.8%                  7.2%
       Belgium           KBC Bancassurance Holding                  15973          1.0%                99.0%
       Belgium           Solvay SA                                 133472        76.7%                 23.3%
       France            Air Liquide SA                            336784        94.2%                  5.8%
       France            Alcatel-Lucent SA                         279966        73.3%                 26.7%
       France            AXA SA                                   4296474        41.3%                 58.7%
   742
          ICE, reply to question 43 of Q10 – Questionnaire to Competitors, Phase II [...]*.
   743
          As an example, in the NYX document "Update on actions in French and Dutch markets, Executive
          Committee", it is outlined that ".[…]*. Another example is contained in a NYX document entitled
          "Derivative risk profile, Q3 2006", Reference ENX-00291-00002 "threat from Eurex in Paris IEOs
          market share. Eurex's market share may reach critical mass and result in sizeable shift of IEO business
          to Eurex. Key factors are: ".[…]*". Another example is the internal analysis made by Liffe in a
          Business Report to the members of the Liffe Board dated 17 February 2009 - Reference ENX – 00050 –
          00001, p 7 to 9.
   744
          See for example, DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011,
          .[…]*.
   745
          NYX internal document, Email of 4 June 2010 at 10:04, Reference ENX-00855 -00001.
   746
          See Notifying Parties' reply of 19 September 2011 to the RFI of 13 September 2011, annex 5. It should
          be noted that there may be some degree of volatility in these market shares from month to month.
EN                                                    188                                                         EN

   France      BNP Paribas SA                         785675 84.6% 15.4%
   France      Bouygues SA                            176167 98.0%  2.0%
   France      Carrefour SA                           732386 86.0% 14.0%
   France      Credit Agricole SA                    3571817 18.2% 81.8%
   France      Groupe Danone SA                       615331 94.2%  5.8%
   France      Electricite de France                  800806 92.3%  7.7%
               European Aeronautic Defence and
   France      Space Company                           97221 22.4% 77.6%
   France      France Telecom SA                    14361100 56.4% 43.6%
   France      Lafarge SA                             227937 84.6% 15.4%
   France      Lagardere SCA                           30427 99.4%  0.6%
   France      L'Oreal SA                             187097 83.6% 16.4%
               LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis
   France      Vuitton SA                             616033 98.6%  1.4%
   France      Pernod-Ricard                          107352 68.4% 31.6%
   France      Peugeot SA                              25686  8.9% 91.1%
   France      Pinault-Printemps-Redoute               46766 97.5%  2.5%
   France      Renault SA                              19539 15.8% 84.2%
   France      Compagnie de Saint Gobain              324029 73.6% 26.4%
   France      Sanofi-Aventis SA                     2536371 53.1% 46.9%
   France      Schneider Electric SA                  164911 93.5%  6.5%
   France      Societe Generale SA                    493634 90.5%  9.5%
   France      Societe Television Francaise (T.F.1)    94441 89.6% 10.4%
   France      Sodexo SA                               37226 28.1% 71.9%
   France      Total SA                             11373817 71.8% 28.2%
   France      Vivendi Universal SA                  2441300 90.7%  9.3%
   Netherlands Aegon NV                                52866  8.9% 91.1%
   Netherlands Koninklijke Ahold NV                  2755671 95.2%  4.8%
EN                                            189                        EN

        Netherlands        Akzo Nobel NV                         937996      99.6%           0.4%
        Netherlands        ASML Holding NV                       585351      99.9%           0.1%
        Netherlands        Heineken NV                          2002279      98.3%           1.7%
        Netherlands        ING Groep NV                         1733697      98.2%           1.8%
        Netherlands        Koninklijke DSM N.V                   499238      96.4%           3.6%
        Netherlands        Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV   1668557      97.6%           2.4%
        Netherlands        Reed Elsevier NV                     3566659      97.4%           2.6%
                           Royal Dutch SHELL PLC 'A' SHARES
        Netherlands        EURO                                 9448373      96.9%           3.1%
        Netherlands        Royal KPN NV                        11353156      96.7%           3.3%
        Netherlands        TNT N.V.                             1119899      99.9%           0.1%
        Netherlands        Unilever NV                         14003374      98.2%           1.8%
        Portugal           BANCO BPI STOCK FUTURE                161400      99.8%           0.2%
                           BANCO COMERCIAL PORTUGUES
        Portugal           STOCK FUT                            1320757      99.5%           0.5%
        Portugal           BANCO ESPIRITO SANTO STND FUT         498916      99.1%           0.9%
        Portugal           GALP ENERGIA, SGPS, S.A.               60754       0.9%          99.1%
        Portugal           JERONIMO MARTINS STND FUT             175625     100.0%           0.0%
                           PORTUGAL TELECOM STOCK
        Portugal           FUTURE                               1551280      92.8%           7.2%
   Source: World Federation of Exchanges, as provided by AFME.
   (831) Similarly, as concerns German equity futures, the Notifying Parties compete in […]*
           names on order book. NYX achieves significant volumes in almost all of these, and has
           the majority of the liquidity in six.
           Table 9: Market shares of the Notifying Parties in futures on single stocks –
           Germany
       Underlying                                                Volume         NYX     DB1
       Allianz AG                                                    33868923     12.1%      87.9%
       BASF AG                                                       11438126     52.0%      48.0%
       Bayer AG                                                      10133880     63.4%      36.6%
EN                                                         190                                     EN

        Bayerische Motoren Werke AG                                      4881856    73.2%       26.8%
        Commerzbank AG                                                     339252    0.2%       99.8%
        Daimler AG                                                       1063853    34.1%       65.9%
        Deutsche Bank AG                                                11132178    45.6%       54.4%
        Deutsche Post AG                                                   382222    8.6%       91.4%
        Deutsche Telekom AG                                              1259926     9.9%       90.1%
        E.ON AG                                                         27387011    60.4%       39.6%
        Infineon Technologies AG                                           201524   17.8%       82.2%
        Metro AG                                                         2305823    76.9%       23.1%
        Munchener Rucksversicherungs Gesellschaft AG                    18761286    10.2%       89.8%
        Porsche Automobil Holding SE                                         6595    9.2%       90.8%
        RWE AG                                                           6320228    45.0%       55.0%
        SAP AG                                                          21167988    36.4%       63.6%
        Siemens AG                                                       4277856    23.9%       76.1%
        ThyssenKrupp AG                                                  2104551    24.6%       75.4%
        Volkswagen AG-PFD                                                1676073    64.0%       36.0%
            Source: World Federation of Exchanges, as provided by AFME.
   (832) In single stock options, the Notifying Parties compete head-to-head in […]*
            underlyings, all on the Euronext markets including the UK. These are […]* UK
            underlyings, […]* Belgian, […]* French and […]* Dutch747. The full table of market
            shares is as follows:
            Table 10: Market shares of Notifying Parties in options on single stocks (NYX
            home markets)
       Country                Underlying                                Volume      NYX     DB1
       Belgium                FORTIS (B)                                     266134  100.0%       0.0%
       Belgium                ANHEUSER- BUSCH INBEV NV                       431276   73.4%      26.6%
       Belgium                Belgacom SA                                     56076   30.8%      69.2%
       Belgium                Colruyt SA                                      11229   89.2%      10.8%
   747
             There are no Portuguese overlaps.
EN                                                           191                                       EN

   Belgium Delhaize Group                   42110 89.8% 10.2%
   Belgium GBL                              15651 91.3%  8.7%
   Belgium KBC Bancassurance Holding       210583 74.9% 25.1%
   Belgium Mobistar SA                      16542 82.5% 17.5%
   Belgium Solvay SA                        47280 72.9% 27.1%
   Belgium UCB SA                           53700 75.4% 24.6%
   Belgium UMICORE                          27789 93.8%  6.2%
   France  ACCOR SA EUROPEAN NEW           135387 90.3%  9.7%
   France  Air France KLM                  184424 78.7% 21.3%
   France  AIR LIQUIDE EUROPEAN            718202 75.2% 24.8%
   France  ALCATEL-LUCENT SA EUROPEAN     7919271 92.6%  7.4%
   France  Alstom RGPT                     880987 79.5% 20.5%
   France  Atos Origin SA                   27359 83.9% 16.1%
   France  AXA SA                         5295921 74.5% 25.5%
   France  BNP PARIBAS EUROPEAN           3281824 81.7% 18.3%
   France  BOUYGUES EUROPEAN              1338085 80.8% 19.2%
   France  Cap Gemini SA                   310561 80.5% 19.5%
   France  Carrefour SA                   4230221 87.2% 12.8%
   France  Casino Guichard Perrachon SA     41520 61.8% 38.2%
   France  Christian Dior SA                 4256 43.2% 56.8%
   France  CNP ASSURANCES (100)              1477 77.5% 22.5%
   France  Credit Agricole SA             3565961 83.3% 16.7%
   France  Groupe Danone                  1167321 75.6% 24.4%
   France  Dassault Systemes SA             27985 62.5% 37.5%
   France  DEXIA EUROPEAN                  251648 75.5% 24.5%
   France  Euro Aero Defense and Space     784751 82.4% 17.6%
   France  ELECTRICITE DE FRANCE EUROPEAN  886506 85.1% 14.9%
   France  Essilor International SA         49253 87.6% 12.4%
EN                                    192                     EN

   France France Telecom SA                6848930  81.8% 18.2%
   France GDF SUEZ EUROPEAN                2790154  74.5% 25.5%
   France HERMES INTERNATIONAL (100)         22411  63.7% 36.3%
   France L'Oreal SA                        540117  72.4% 27.6%
   France Lafarge SA                        689622  83.8% 16.2%
   France LAGARDERE SCA EUROPEAN             81936 100.0%  0.0%
   France LEGRAND SA STD OPTIONS                40 100.0%  0.0%
   France LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis V        961939  80.8% 19.2%
   France METROPOLE TELEVISION (100)           319 100.0%  0.0%
   France MICHELIN EUROPEAN                 368119 100.0%  0.0%
   France NATIXIS EUROPEAN                   22615  93.1%  6.9%
   France Pernod-Ricard                     392770  87.9% 12.1%
   France PEUGEOT SA EUROPEAN               933811  85.9% 14.1%
   France Pinault-Printemps-Redoute         245798  92.0%  8.0%
   France PUBLICIS GROUPE (100)              55103  88.0% 12.0%
   France Renault SA                       1452457  86.0% 14.0%
   France SAFRAN SA (100)                    26914  89.1% 10.9%
   France Cie de Saint-Gobain              2163477  79.7% 20.3%
   France Sanofi-Aventis                   1810229  77.4% 22.6%
   France Schneider Electric SA             623086  77.1% 22.9%
   France SCOR SE                            16387  67.2% 32.8%
   France SOCIETE GENERALE EUROPEAN        3875753  85.2% 14.8%
   France SODEXO SA EUROPEAN                 55699  47.6% 52.4%
   France STMicroelectronics NV            1830893  89.8% 10.2%
   France SUEZ ENVIRONNEMENT SA (EUROPEAN)   75802  93.1%  6.9%
   France Technip SA                         53340  27.7% 72.3%
   France Societe Telev Francaise 1          54892  56.8% 43.2%
   France Thales SA                          66841  83.6% 16.4%
EN                                  193                         EN

               TOTAL SA EX EVENT PACKAGE
   France      EUROPEAN                          5052186  80.4% 19.6%
   France      UNIBAIL-RODAMCO SE (100)            46287  54.2% 45.8%
   France      Valeo SA Amer Phys FLEX Opt         47236  71.8% 28.2%
   France      Vallourec SA                       153568  86.8% 13.2%
   France      VEOLIA ENVIRONNEMENT EUROPEAN      715036  83.2% 16.8%
   France      Vinci SA                          1275944  85.8% 14.2%
   France      VIVENDI SA EUROPEAN               4313535  80.5% 19.5%
   Netherlands AEGON WEEKLY OPTION               8013683  90.3%  9.7%
   Netherlands Koninklijke Ahold NV              3397911  95.5%  4.5%
   Netherlands Akzo Nobel NV                     1624145  95.7%  4.3%
   Netherlands ARCELORMITTAL WEEKLY             12260155 100.0%  0.0%
   Netherlands ASML Holding NV                   2535773  92.5%  7.5%
               KONINKLIJKE BOSKALIS WESTMINSTER
   Netherlands N.                                 384022  99.7%  0.3%
   Netherlands Corio NV                           151268  98.9%  1.1%
   Netherlands CSM                                262292  99.3%  0.7%
   Netherlands Koninklijke DSM NV                1343838  96.3%  3.7%
   Netherlands Fugro NV                           627342  98.1%  1.9%
   Netherlands Heineken NV                        787715  91.4%  8.6%
   Netherlands IMTECH N.V.                        437088 100.0%  0.0%
   Netherlands ING OLD                          18276691  92.4%  7.6%
   Netherlands Koninklijke BAM Groep NV           998562  98.1%  1.9%
   Netherlands Royal KPN NV                      6412013  94.9%  5.1%
   Netherlands NUTRECO N.V                        174274 100.0%  0.0%
   Netherlands Konin Philips Electronics NV      6022017  89.0% 11.0%
   Netherlands Randstad Holdings NV               732945  95.9%  4.1%
   Netherlands Reed Elsevier NV                   832472  86.4% 13.6%
EN                                          194                       EN

   Netherlands ROYAL DUTCH WEEKLY O                11104677  92.1%  7.9%
   Netherlands SBM OFFSHORE NV                       949113  90.7%  9.3%
   Netherlands TNT NV                               1405451  93.3%  6.7%
   Netherlands TomTom NV                            2024303  97.3%  2.7%
   Netherlands UNILEVER OLD                         4462692  88.3% 11.7%
   Netherlands USG PEOPLE N.V. AMERICAN STYLE STOC   661003  98.3%  1.7%
   Netherlands Wereldhave NV                         200373  98.4%  1.6%
   Netherlands WOLTERS-KLUWER                        264183  82.1% 17.9%
   UK          Anglo American plc                    174358  99.8%  0.2%
   UK          AstraZeneca plc                       201654  98.9%  1.1%
   UK          Aviva plc                             167578  99.8%  0.2%
   UK          BAE Systems plc                       125310 100.0%  0.0%
   UK          Barclays PLC                         2895640  99.8%  0.2%
   UK          BG Group plc                          261324  99.9%  0.1%
   UK          BHP Billiton plc                      376315  99.7%  0.3%
   UK          BP PLC                               2765992  99.7%  0.3%
   UK          British Sky Broadcasting Group plc    139277  99.9%  0.1%
   UK          BT Group plc                          554124  98.1%  1.9%
   UK          Centrica Plc                           58291 100.0%  0.0%
   UK          Compass Group plc                      20274 100.0%  0.0%
   UK          Diageo PLC                            225180  98.6%  1.4%
   UK          GlaxoSmithKline plc                   313369  99.2%  0.8%
   UK          HSBC Holdings plc                    1130163  99.5%  0.5%
   UK          Legal & General Group PLC             146356 100.0%  0.0%
   UK          LLOYDS TSB GROUP PLC STND OPT        1934716  99.7%  0.3%
   UK          Marks and Spencer PLC                 206642  95.6%  4.4%
   UK          National Grid PLC                      77882 100.0%  0.0%
   UK          Prudential plc                        264224  99.8%  0.2%
EN                                          195                          EN

       UK                    Reckitt Benckiser Group Plc                  17220    96.5%          3.5%
       UK                    Rio Tinto PLC                               447710    99.7%          0.3%
       UK                    Royal Bank of Scotland PLC                  777510    99.9%          0.1%
                             ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC 'B' SHARES
       UK                    STND OPT                                    112203    97.5%          2.5%
       UK                    RSA Insurance Group Plc                      47849   100.0%          0.0%
       UK                    Sainsbury (J) PLC                           123167    99.8%          0.2%
       UK                    Standard Chartered Plc                       95252    99.8%          0.2%
       UK                    Tesco PLC STND OPT                          375635    98.3%          1.7%
       UK                    Unilever PLC                                 43062    93.7%          6.3%
       UK                    Vodafone Group plc                        4764355     99.7%          0.3%
       UK                    Xstrata plc                                 528827    99.7%          0.3%
   Source: World Federation of Exchanges, as provided by AFME.
   (833) From Table 10 it can be seen that, amongst the […]* overlaps, DB achieves at least 5%
           in 75 cases, at least 20% in 27 cases, and the majority of the liquidity in 4 cases. This is
           a picture which is difficult to reconcile with the Notifying Parties' claim that "instances
           where both of the Parties achieve significant trading volumes in respect of derivatives
           based on equities from the same country are few"748 and that, notwithstanding the
           general tendency of liquidity to settle on a particular platform, the Notifying Parties
           nonetheless, by virtue of their unique competitive relationship to each other, manage to
           sustain an ongoing battle for liquidity in single stock derivatives. As emphasised above,
           elimination of the only competitor in these cases, even in those instances where its
           market share is modest, would clearly reinforce the market power of the merged entity,
           which would gain thereby a monopoly position.
   (834) It follows that there is considerable competition between the Notifying Parties on order
           book in single stock futures and options, where they are each other's closest and in most
           cases only existing competitor, contradicting the Notifying Parties' claim that "instances
           where both of the Parties achieve significant trading volumes in respect of derivatives
           based on equities from the same country are few"749. Indeed in an email from […]* the
           "threat of Eurex launching IOEs" is described as is the plan of action to face this
           "threat" concluding that "Further actions underway which will lead to […]*".750 This
           competition would be eliminated by the merger.
   748
            Form CO, derivatives, paragraph 6.4, page 6.
   749
            Form CO, paragraph 106.
   750
            NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Email from
            ,[…]*, 06 January 2010 to ,[…]*, Reference: ENX-00209-00001.
EN                                                         196                                            EN

                            11.2.1.5.2.2.       Other EEA markets
   (835) Outside their "home" countries, the Notifying Parties also compete in futures on equities
         listed in other European jurisdictions. The Commission and the Notifying Parties have
         not been able to obtain trading figures on the "home" market for most of these stocks,
         with the exception of Spanish equity futures. However, this case is also instructive as to
         competition between the Notifying Parties, which have achieved, together, the majority
         of liquidity in all of the ten Spanish single stock futures which they both list, with the
         national market, MEFF, in second or even, frequently, third place, as shown in Table
         11751.
         Table 11: Market shares of the Notifying Parties in futures on single stocks (Spain)
        Underlying                     Volume             NYX            DB1               MEFF
        Abertis Infraestructuras
        SA                                   1058986              18.1%            67.0%              14.8%
        Banco Bilbao Vizcaya
        Argentaria SA                       48139576              44.8%            42.4%              12.8%
        Banco Popular Espanol SA             2861365              67.5%             4.3%              28.2%
        Banco de Sabadell SA                  690193              76.5%             4.7%              18.8%
        Banco Santander SA                  59241033              65.3%            28.3%                6.3%
        Gas Natural SDG SA                   1596745              47.5%            48.3%                4.2%
        Iberdrola SA                         6606078              79.7%             7.1%              13.2%
        Inditex SA                            968710              72.6%            23.5%                4.0%
        Repsol YPF SA                        6008526              70.8%            19.4%                9.7%
        Telefonica SA                       39148283              58.5%            27.7%              13.8%
           Source: World Federation of Exchanges, as provided by AFME.
   (836) Overlaps in the Notifying Parties' offerings in other stock futures concern […]* US,
         […]* Italian, […]* Swedish and […]* Finnish.752 Although the Commission does not
         have a complete picture of the market in these cases, the Notifying Parties both actively
         compete, showing they serve an active demand to trade these futures away from the
         home market. In all but six cases, the smaller of the two Parties has at least 5% of their
         combined share, and in seventeen cases, the smaller has at least 20% of the combined
   751
           See Notifying Parties' reply of 19 September 2011 to the RFI of 13 September 2011, annex 5..
   752
           Credit Suisse, Nestle, Novartis, Roche, Swiss Re, Swisscom, UBS, Zurich Financial Services, AT&T,
           Intel, IBM, Microsoft, Verizon, Generali, Bulgari, Enel, ENI, Fiat, Intesa Sanpaolo (savings), Mediaset,
           Mediobanca, Saipem, Snam, Telecom Italia (savings shares), Terna, UniCredit, Nordea, Ericsson,
           Nokia, Stora Enso, UPM-Kymmene Oyj.
EN                                                         197                                                      EN

         share. The Notifying Parties have only indicated the respective home market as a
         competitor in any of these cases (namely IDEM for Italian derivatives, Nasdaq OMX
         for the Scandinavian stocks etc), and assuming this to be the case, the notified
         transaction results, even for these stocks for which the Notifying Parties are not
         historically the home market, in a three to two merger, with elimination of almost
         certainly the closest competitor, since, unlike the national markets, both Eurex and Liffe
         can offer wide international reach and therefore compete most closely for those
         customers who do not have a natural focus on the national market.
   (837) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties offer the following figures for actual
         competition in instruments from a particular country where they both overlap, although
         conflating on- and off-order book753. In futures and options taken together, the picture is
         as follows (since OTC does not belong to the relevant market, it has been eliminated
         from the Notifying Parties' figures which have been adjusted accordingly):
         Table 12: Market shares of the Notifying Parties in futures and options on single
         stocks, 2010
   Country            of NYSE Liffe         Eurex               Combined               Others
   underlying
   stock
   Austria                  [50-60%]*       [40-50%]*           [90-100%]*             [0-5%]*          (Wiener
                                                                                       Boerse)
   Finland                  [0-5%]*         [90-100%]*          [90-100%]*             [0-5%]*          (Nasdaq
                                                                                       OMX)
   Italy                    [10-20%]*       [10-20%]*           [20-30%]*              [70-80%]* (IDEM)
   Norway                   [20-30%]*       [0-5%]*             [20-30%]*              [70-80%]* (Nasdaq
                                                                                       OMX         and       Oslo
                                                                                       Boers)
   Spain                    [40-50%]*       [20-30%]*           [70-80%]*              [20-30%]* (MEFF)
   Sweden                   [0-5%]*         [0-5%]*             [0-5%]*                [90-100%]* (Nasdaq
                                                                                       OMX)
           Source: Commission calculations based on the Notifying Parties' Response to the Statement of Objections, single
           equity section, paragraph 40.
   (838) In addition to the direct elimination of competition, the notified transaction also risks
         removing remaining competition in those adjacent markets that will not already be
         dominated by the Notifying Parties. The merged entity would be able to eliminate
         competition in trading in a number of products within their core asset classes but
         outside their home geographies
   753
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 40. Figures by contracts
           traded 2010.
EN                                                       198                                                               EN

   (839) In this regard, existing smaller competitors have expressed concerns that the merged
         entity would be in a position to engage in conduct which would undermine such
         competition. For example, Nasdaq OMX states that "The merged entity would drive
         competing platforms out of the market since it would suck in liquidity both for
         established products currently traded on other exchanges and importantly also for any
         new product launched by other exchanges (or MTFs) in the future simply because of
         vastly lower collateral costs for customers. Once competitors would have been driven
         out of the market (or would have been prevented from entering it) the merged entity
         would have complete freedom to exploit its dominance by extracting extra fees from
         customers, which eventually would also deprive customers of alleged margin
         efficiencies that are currently presented as exceptional benefits of the proposed merger
         for customers".754
   (840) The current state of competition between the Notifying Parties in respect of European
         single stock options lends support to the above analysis, since, notwithstanding the
         tendency of liquidity to aggregate on a single platform, significant instances of split
         liquidity have occurred, and even instances where major national blue chips show much
         more derivatives trading on the Notifying Parties' exchanges than in their country of
         origin. This effect can be explained by the "liquidity pull" factor.
   (841) Indeed, this explanation finds support inside NYX. An email from […]* to […]* ([…]*
         of NYX) takes the view that[Eurex’s bigger market share in listed equity derivatives is
         due in part to DB’s Eurostoxx contract]*755 and expressed the concern that […]*.756
   (842) In this respect, it should be noted that if this threat was perceived before the merger by a
         participants such as NYX, it would clearly be more relevant post-merger for the
         remaining smaller competitors in those European equity derivatives which remain
         traded primarily on their national exchanges, such as Spanish, Italian and Nordic equity
         derivatives and those from the newer Member States. As a result of the merger
         therefore, there is a risk that the merged entity would be able to progressively eliminate
         remaining competition in the trading of their core European single stock equity options
         and futures which are outside their home geographies.
   (843) Indeed, as already indicated in the SO, this effect is not limited to those geographies
         where the Notifying Parties overlap today and could progressively apply to most or all
         of the EEA. For example in futures on Danish single stocks, Eurex is not present, but
         Liffe (including Bclear) already has the vast majority of the liquidity757. The effect of
         the further broadening of the merged entity's margin pool could be to further squeeze
         out competition from the historical incumbent, Nasdaq OMX.
   754
           Reply to question 5 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, phase II [...]*.
   755
           Representing in 2010 nearly half of all Eurex revenue, see Annex D.19 to the Form CO and Section
           2.4.2.1above.
   756
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, with title, Email
           of 4.06.2010 at 10:04, Reference ENX-00855 -00001.
   757
           Nasdaq OMX, Comments on the SO submitted pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing
           Regulation and observations at the Oral Hearing, 28 and 31 October 2011, pages 3 and 4, [...]*.
EN                                                     199                                                      EN

                            11.2.1.5.2.3.      Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO
   (844) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties make a number of points, which can
         be categorised under four main headings.
   (845) The Notifying Parties argue, firstly, that: "Trading of single equity derivatives is
         extraordinarily competitive, and the Transaction will not change this fact. Although the
         SO identifies a number of products where NYX and DB each offer the same product, it
         fails to explain how NYX and DB are particularly close competitors or how they would
         be able to exercise any market power post-Transaction"758
   (846) Secondly, the Notifying Parties attempt to argue that the Commission has failed to
         consider a number of competitors and constraints: "With respect to market definition,
         the SO concedes that ETD “lookalike” contracts traded OTC – which are available for
         virtually any exchange-traded single equity derivative product – are a realistic
         alternative to exchange trading. However, the competitive assessment in the SO fails to
         take trading of these OTC lookalikes into account. In particular, the SO fails to identify
         other competitors and take their market shares into account. Just as importantly, the
         Commission fails to appropriately consider the competitive constraint imposed by OTC
         trading generally (including off-book trading facilities, which the Commission
         incorrectly concludes should be considered in a separate relevant product market)." 759
   (847) Thirdly, the Notifying Parties argue that "although both Parties offer single-equity
         derivatives, they are not particularly close competitors. These products are traded in
         significant volumes only in respect of derivatives based on equities listed in a few
         countries. In these segments, the increment brought about by the Transaction is
         minimal, as the bulk of liquidity in each segment is clearly with one Party." 760
   (848) Fourthly, the Notifying Parties state that "the SO identifies a number of overlaps in the
         Parties' single equity derivatives offerings, including a number of specific single equity
         derivative products where liquidity is split between the Parties' venues These examples
         are not indicative of intense competition between NYX and DB in trading and clearing
         of single equity derivatives products."761
   (849) The Notifying Parties also make arguments relating to entry and buyer power. These
         arguments are addressed in Sections 11.2.1.7 and 11.2.1.8.
                            11.2.1.5.2.4.      Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the SO
   (850) As regards the Notifying Parties' first claim, the Commission already outlined in the SO
         that the Notifying Parties, in their home markets, were not only the closest but each
         other's only competitors.762 Outside these home markets, the Commission identified a
   758
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 1.
   759
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 3.
   760
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 3.
   761
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 30.
   762
           See SO, section 2.3.1.1.
EN                                                       200                                         EN

         number of further examples where the number of competitors would be reduced from
         three to two as a result of the merger, and considered the Notifying Parties each other's
         closest competitors in these markets, although even if this were not so, concerns would
         still arise.
   (851) The Notifying Parties confirm the market shares and competitive situation relied upon
         by the Commission in their response to the SO itself. In two of these cases – Spain and
         Finland – the merged entity would be by far the market leader. Moreover, the
         Commission has shown, based on the Notifying Parties' own internal documents as well
         as concerns raised by third parties, that the reduction in competition would not be
         limited "merely" to an addition of pre-merger market shares, but that it is likely that the
         merged entity, due to the gravitational effect of the combined margin pool, would be
         able to grow further and possibly squeeze out competition entirely in those markets.
   (852) Competition between the Notifying Parties is based to a large extent on fees, as already
         outlined above where it was noted that in relation to Italian single stock futures, which
         NYX offers both on its order book and through Bclear and where it currently faces
         competition from both Eurex and IDEM, it introduced fee caps for order book trading
         of these specific instruments, citing "aggressive competition from both Eurex and
         IDEM for the equity derivatives franchise" and considering that […]*.763
   (853) There is therefore every reason to conclude that elimination of competition in this case
         will have exactly the same effects as in other markets, that is, that it will lead to higher
         prices and/or less choice for customers.
   (854) With respect to the second claim, the Commission considered already in the SO any
         possible constraint from OTC lookalikes, and rejected that such a constraint might be in
         any way material. The Commission has considered all competitors, of which there are
         none in the Notifying Parties' home markets (except for the entry on 1 December 2011
         of TOM in the Netherlands, discussed below) and at most one in the other markets
         considered (except for off-order book competition in Norway, where there are two).
         Moreover, the Notifying Parties themselves, although they often refer to alleged
         competitors, are not able to identify these competitors, much less their market shares.
         No other relevant constraints have been identified in the Commission's extensive
         market investigation.
   (855) In respect of the third claim, the Commission considers that it is clearly refuted by the
         facts already presented above and in the SO, since the overlaps occur in particular in the
         most liquid traded stocks and often result in significant shares for the other Party.
   (856) In respect, finally, of the fourth claim, if the observed pattern of market shares is not
         indicative of competition between the Notifying Parties, it is difficult to imagine how it
         could otherwise be interpreted. Competition in this space between the Notifying Parties
         is widely documented in the market investigation, in the Notifying Parties' internal
   763
           NYX internal document, Email of 3 August 2010 from […]* to ,[…]*, ENX-00260. London Notice
           3282 of 28 April 2010 applied these caps to order book trades and was followed by London Notice
           3290 of 1 June extending this to block trades, see Euronext website available at
           http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/056/821/568213.pdf                                         and
           http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/057/695/576950.pdf, both viewed on 30 September 2011.
EN                                                       201                                               EN

         documents, and in public sources, both from the Notifying Parties and from third
         parties.
   (857) The Notifying Parties do not appear to have any alternative explanation of the observed
         data. The closest that they come to such a definition is the claim that, because in a
         minority of the identified overlaps the stocks are components of the Eurostoxx 50
         index, "it is to be expected that significant trading on derivatives of these shares would
         be traded on DB's venue". There is no indication why this should be expected, and
         indeed, as the Commission has shown above, there are examples of other stocks,
         including German and Swiss stocks which, despite being members of the Eurostoxx 50,
         and where the cash instrument is primarily traded on DB, have a majority of their
         derivatives trading volume on Liffe.
   (858) It may also be noted that the Notifying Parties have not endeavoured explicitly to rebut
         the Commission's conclusion in the SO relating to the likelihood that the merged entity
         would be able to further reduce competition also outside its home markets.
                            11.2.1.5.2.5.      Conclusions
   (859) Eurex and Liffe are each other's closest competitors in the broad area of European
         single stock equity derivatives. As demonstrated in this Section of this Decision, this
         conclusion holds irrespective of whether the market comprises all European single
         stock derivatives, is subdivided into options and futures and/or is further subdivided
         according to countries or even the underlying stock. Indeed, should the market
         comprise all European single stock derivatives, the proposed transaction would lead to a
         near monopoly position of the merged entity. Similarly, the notified transaction would
         lead to a monopoly in order book trading of a large number of single stock equity
         futures in Notifying Parties' home countries, in particular the most widely traded stocks
         from Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Portugal, the UK, Germany and Switzerland
         and a large number of single equity options from Belgium, France, the Netherlands and
         the UK. In addition, the notified transaction would eliminate actual competition in order
         book trading between the Notifying Parties in single equity futures for some of the most
         widely traded stocks in a number of other European countries, namely Finland, Italy,
         Spain, and Sweden764. In doing so, it would lead to a three-to-two merger for trading in
         the single equity futures in question, with only the respective national incumbent
         remaining to challenge the merged entity, respectively IDEM (LSE group) in Italy,
         MEFF (BME Group) in Spain and NASDAQ OMX in Sweden and Finland765 and
         eliminate the closest competitor in these markets. Similarly, should the market be
         subdivided according to underlying stock, the notified merger would lead to a
         monopoly as concerns futures and options on a number of individual stocks. In
         addition, the notified transaction would result in a situation in which the merged entity
         would be able to further leverage the scope and scale of its offering in single equity
         futures and options in order to eliminate additional competition outside its home
         markets, resulting in further marginalization of remaining competition in these markets.
   764
           The identified overlaps between the Notifying Parties in Norway and Austria only concern off-order
           book trading. In Norway, two competitors remain.
   765
           The Commission has not analysed whether there is specific European demand for trading in the US
           stocks where the Notifying Parties overlap but this can be left open for the purposes of this Decision.
EN                                                      202                                                        EN

   (860) It should also be noted that this conclusion applies irrespective of the scope of the
         geographic market. This is because irrespective of whether the market is global or
         narrower, Eurex and Liffe, are the only significant players in this space while in some
         local markets there may be other players active.766
   (861) As a result, the notified transaction eliminates the closest competitors in the area of
         European single stock derivatives irrespective of the precise market definition, leading
         to higher fees, less innovation and de facto no choice for customers of a trading
         platform for these products in the Notifying Parties' home markets as well as a number
         of other countries.
   11.2.1.5.3.      Potential competition
                             11.2.1.5.3.1.      Introduction
   (862) Given the range of the product offering of the Notifying Parties and the extensive
         overlap between them discussed above, they remain, for the reasons set out notably in
         Section 2.1.3, also a real constraint on each other even if one or other may have little to
         no trading at a given point in time in a given contract. In this regard, it is relevant also
         to note that […]*.
   (863) In addition to this, there are few barriers for either Notifying Party to list new European
         equity options and futures in direct competition to the other, as they have frequently
         done in the past.767
   (864) The Notifying Parties in their response to the SO argue that potential competition is not
         a concern because entry and expansion are easy.
   (865) Entry is addressed in Section 11.2.1.7 below, but in any case, given the fixed costs of
         entry and given that the merged entity could likely starve an entrant of liquidity by
         reducing its fees for long enough to repel the initial threat, it cannot be considered that
         potential entry gives rise to a potential constraint equivalent to that of the other Party
         which is already present and established on the market and possesses a large and
         correlated margin pool.
   (866) In respect of expansion, although the Notifying Parties argue that any derivatives
         exchange could list new single stock derivatives on stocks outside of its home country
         or countries, they fail to provide any examples of this happening, and indeed, the
         market investigation did not identify any. Even in the case of LSE, which has long had
         a derivatives trading platform, that platform does not list, much less achieve any
         volume in, derivatives on UK stocks. Nasdaq OMX does not list any derivatives on
         stocks from outside its home countries, with the exception of certain non-EEA
   766
           See Section 11.1.1.2.3.3 of this Decision.
   767
           In addition, where the incentive to list on the central order book is absent, on Liffe's side, the additional
           option remains of admitting a contract to clearing on BClear with a view to capturing some wholesale
           or flexible volumes. Although it is not the policy of Eurex to do this, it admits a larger number of
           instruments to trading on the central order book, and so the effect is similar.
EN                                                        203                                                            EN

         instruments. Indeed, as analysis of past entries shows Eurex and Liffe are each other's
         closest potential competitors in this area.
   (867) It may thus be concluded that the Notifying Parties constrain each other as closest
         potential competitor across the entire range of their single equity future and options
         products. It is only in the event that they were to list a single stock derivative in one of
         the non-home EEA markets, which is not listed by the national market for that
         particular stock, that it might in certain instances be a closer potential competitor than
         the other Party. Such an event would likely be of limited commercial significance and is
         unlikely to materialise.
                            11.2.1.5.3.2.      No other player could maintain sufficient competitive
                                 pressure on the merged entity post-merger
   (868) As explained in the introduction to this Section of this Decision, Eurex and Liffe are
         uniquely well placed to enter each other's markets in the area of European single equity
         derivatives. There is no other competitor that could exert similar competitive pressure
         in this area as the Notifying Parties exert on each other pre-merger.
                                 11.2.1.5.3.2.1.        Entry by cash MTFs: Turquoise and BATS/Chi-X
                                     Europe
   (869) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties state that Commission's findings as
         regards the entry of MTFs into the derivatives space where the Notifying Parties are
         active is "not supported by the single example of Turquoise, in particular where the
         slate of potential entrants is as diverse as those in the Table above" (the table sets out
         MTFs active in the cash markets such as Sigma X, UBS MTF, TOM MTF, NX MTF,
         Quote MTF, Burgundy, Equiduct, Smartpool, Chi-X Europe and BATS).768
   (870) In this context, the Notifying Parties have also made general statements that "MTFs
         impose a significant competitive constraint on the Parties and will impose an even
         more significant constraint in the future as a result of market and regulatory
         developments..."
   (871) The general attempt of Turquoise to enter derivatives trading in competition with the
         Notifying Parties is discussed in the Section 11.2.1.7 below. In respect of single stock
         equities, the Notifying Parties state that "Turquoise is therefore a viable existing
         competitor that is likely to expand in the near future". This statement is incorrect, since
         Turquoise does not offer single stock equities (other than on Russian underlyings as
         successor to LSE's EDX platform), and achieves almost no volume in the one contract
         it does list in competition to the Notifying Parties, the FTSE 100 index. Although
         Turquoise may have expressed a desire to enter some of these markets, the evidence on
         the file indicates that it has no prospect of significant commercial success at present.
   (872) The plans of BATS/Chi-X Europe to enter the market are even less advanced, and
         whilst it is true that single stock derivatives similar to those of the Notifying Parties can
         probably be listed without infringing any IP rights, and are therefore easier to list than
   768
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Equity Index Derivatives, paragraph 47.
EN                                                       204                                           EN

         index products, they are also far less attractive since a large majority of turnover is in
         the index and not in individual equity derivatives769. It is therefore doubtful whether
         single stock derivatives alone would be sufficient to constitute a business case for entry
         even if all the other barriers to entry – in particular the gravitational effect of the margin
         pool – could be overcome. This point has also been made in the context of the market
         test of the proposed remedies in this case, which is further discussed below.
   (873) In this regard, the Commission notes that other than the TOM entry into derivatives
         (discussed below), the Notifying Parties have not brought any new evidence in their
         response to the SO, nor indeed any evidence at any earlier stage of the proceedings, to
         show how these MTFs, currently active in cash markets, will effectively enter the
         derivatives space in a likely, timely and significant way.
   (874) As this Decision outlines, cash markets and derivative markets exhibit very different
         characteristics (see, for example, Recitals (941) and (950)). Contrary to what occurs in
         cash markets, the open interest and cross margining play a very important role and
         constitute significant barriers to entry in the derivatives markets concerned, making
         effective entry by these players unlikely, not timely and/or not sufficient in order to
         deter or defeat the anti-competitive effects of the merger.
                            11.2.1.5.3.3.      TOM
   (875) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties provide, as regards The Order
         Machine (TOM), a document purporting to evidence "the fact that NYX has been
         closely following TOM’s entry into derivatives […]*"770.
   (876) The Commission notes that this document is very recent, dated 14 October 2011 (post-
         dating the SO in this case by nine days), and refers to TOM initiating activity in 1
         December 2011 only. The Notifying Parties have not produced any documents from an
         earlier period proving that TOM's entry was "closely followed", even though its plans
         to do so have been known since at least the beginning of the year.
   (877) This document states that […]*. According to the information provided, the only
         currently announced plans relate only to single stock derivatives for the Amsterdam
         market. […]*771. Furthermore, according to TOM, market participants are claiming that
         these fees "only benefit the members who trade in large sizes in volume" - that is to say
         those who can also benefit more from open interest and cross margining possibilities.
         These are therefore very specific and localised targeted actions by NYX. This is
         explained given the localised threat posed by TOM for Dutch single equity derivatives.
   (878) Moreover, TOM has very limited distribution possibilities, as it has only a handful of
         members, compared to more than […]* members of Liffe. The Commission also notes
         that […]*. There is therefore some legal uncertainty as to whether TOM will indeed be
         able to operate in the marketplace, even if just in the Netherlands.
   769
           For example, of a total of €275.1m Eurex sales revenue in 3Q11, €8.9m came from European Single
           Stock products, whilst €51.6m came from European Interest Rate derivatives and €136.3m came from
           European Equity Index derivatives – source Deutsche Borse 3Q11 Interim report, page 9.
   770
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraph 9.
   771
           TOM, response to Commission's RFI of 14 November 2011, [...]*.
EN                                                       205                                                EN

   (879) The Commission therefore concludes that not only is there legal uncertainty as to
          whether TOM will be able to operate a derivatives business, […]*, that it has at this
          stage a very limited distribution network (a handful of members). It may therefore be
          concluded that the likelihood of sustained entry is in doubt or unknown, that it is at best
          a localised threat for a limited number of single equity instruments, that its expansion
          possibilities are unknown, that the time necessary to implement such eventual
          expansion would be uncertain, as would be the scale at which it would occur.
                            11.2.1.5.3.4.      Conclusion on potential competition in the area of European
                                single stock derivatives
   (880) As demonstrated in this Section, Eurex and Liffe are each other's closest potential
          competitors in the area of European single equity derivatives irrespective of the precise
          product and geographic market definition. This unique competitive constraint would be
          eliminated post-merger while there is currently no other player that could sufficiently
          constrain the merged entity post-merger.
   11.2.1.5.4. Competition to introduce new products in the area of European single
       stock derivatives
   (881) As in the case of interest rate derivatives, numerous replies to the market investigation
          confirmed that innovation continued to be an important theme within the Notifying
          Parties' core equity franchises. Thus NASDAQ OMX states that "in equity related
          products the trend goes towards products that cater for more specific needs/investment
          opportunities or risk mitigation such as dividend, volatility, duration in contracts".772
   (882) Indeed, DB has developed a suite of products around dividend and volatility futures. It
          currently offers single stock dividend futures in 87 underlyings, including all of the
          Eurostoxx 50 components, which number numerous underlyings where the regular
          futures and options liquidity is primarily on Liffe.773 This offering was launched in
          January 2010, following the earlier launch in June 2008 of dividend futures on the
          Eurostoxx index itself.774
   (883) According to a recent report carried out by Reuters, "Dividend futures on the index …
          already amount to a significant market on Eurex, with trading of about 10,000
          contracts per day for a total volume of around 23 billion euros ($33.4 billion) in 2009,
          a Eurex spokesman said. Based on investor and dealer queries and anecdotal evidence,
          the exchange expects trading in the new single company dividend futures to become a
          significant percentage of that volume, he added, citing about half as a rule of
          thumb."775
   772
           Reply to question 72 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase II [...]*.
   773
           DB's internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, ".[…]*.
   774
           See Eurex website, available at http://www.eurexchange.com/about/press/press_577_en.html, document
           entitled "Eurex to Launch New Futures on Dividends of Dow Jones EURO STOXX 50", viewed on 21
           September 2011.
   775
           http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/01/11/dividend-futures-eurex-idUSLDE60A1OO20100111,
           viewed on 21 September 2011.
EN                                                      206                                                   EN

   (884) Dividend futures on single stocks have yet to be launched by Liffe. However, the
         competitive threat is taken seriously by Eurex, which, at a moment when its own
         project to list single stock dividend futures is falling behind, states that "This raises the
         threa[t] that Euronext Liffe will be the first to enter this segment and might be in a
         position to win the OTC business in single name dividend products, in a similar way as
         we did it in the EuroSTOXX50 Index product"776.
   (885) This threat is then also specifically identified later in the document submitted to the
         Board for its decision to launch these products, identifying Liffe as a "potential threat"
         as "Competitive listing by other (major derivatives exchanges), especially where these
         are seen as the “home market” i.e. Euronext on French names - it has been confirmed
         (by DB) that Euronext LIFFE intends to launch Single Stock Dividend Futures"777.
   (886) Indeed, the notified transaction carries with it the further risk that not only will the
         merger eliminate competition in product innovation between the Notifying Parties, but
         also innovation by smaller third parties which might currently have a chance of success
         in some areas.
   (887) Nasdaq OMX expresses this concern as follows: "The proposed merger would have a
         negative impact on innovation in derivatives products and technology solutions. There
         will be no innovation competition between Eurex and Liffe for new types of exchange
         traded derivatives. Since customers would trade a new product on Eurex/Liffe only
         because of the large margin pool, the merged entity would be able to suck in liquidity in
         any innovative products launched by another derivatives exchange or MTF simply by
         launching a copy cat product. The merged entity could accordingly very easily reap all
         the benefits of a product innovation by a competitor simply because of the margin
         efficiencies it could offer. Moreover the proposed merger will eliminate competition
         between the two most important innovative forces regarding new types of exchange
         traded derivatives. Apart from that, competition of new market entrants with Eurex and
         Liffe on price, technology and innovation in existing and new categories of ETDs will
         be stifled."778
   (888) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties do not address specifically innovation
         in this area and do not discuss the apparent competition in single stock dividend futures.
   (889) It follows that Eurex and Liffe compete closely in bringing new products in the area of
         European single stock equity derivatives, competition which would be eliminated post-
         merger.
   11.2.1.5.5.      Conclusion on single stock equity options and futures
   (890) The significant instances of actual and potential competition between Eurex and Liffe
         that have been outlined in this Section illustrate that the Notifying Parties are each
         other's closest actual and potential competitors within the European single equity
         futures and options space irrespective of the precise product and geographic market
         definition. The market investigation has confirmed that competition in this area has
   776
           DB internal document,.[…]*.
   777
           DB internal document .[…]*.
   778
           Reply to question 71 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, phase II [...]*.
EN                                                     207                                             EN

          primarily involved Eurex and Liffe, with no evidence of credible attempt by other
          platforms to challenge the Notifying Parties in their core equity options and futures
          markets, whether by means of launching lookalike contracts or in terms of innovation.
          This competition between the Notifying Parties – referred to by NYX as a "war"
          involving the Notifying Parties as the only two protagonists779 – would be eliminated
          by the notified transaction while there is no other competitor that could credibly step in
          and discipline the merged entity's behavior.
   (891) The notified transaction by removing the significant competitive constraint that Liffe
          and Eurex currently exert upon each other in the market for European single stock
          equity futures and options constitutes an effective merger to monopoly within their
          home markets and a three-to-two merger in respect of underlyings from a number of
          other EEA Member States, with the prospect that their position will be strengthened
          still further. Given the particularly close competitive relationship existing between the
          Notifying Parties before the merger, the transaction results in the elimination of the
          closest actual and potential competitor.
   (892) As a result of the notified transaction, users are likely to see their choice of platforms
          significantly reduced while the merged entity would have the ability and incentive to
          increase fees and other elements of pricing and diminish innovation.
       11.2.1.6.COMPETITION BETWEEN THE NOTIFYING PARTIES: EQUITY INDICES
   11.2.1.6.1.      Actual and potential competition in existing products
   (893) According to figures provided by the Notifying Parties, Eurex offers 72 Equity Index
          Futures and 77 Equity Index Options on its order book. Most of these are based on
          Stoxx and Eurostoxx and cover various segments of the indices. In addition to its Stoxx
          products, Eurex also offers, inter alia, the German Dax index, Dow Jones indices,
          MSCI, the OMX Helsinki 25 index, and the Korean Kospi 200. It does not offer FTSE
          or Eurofirst indices. It further offers a volatility index future and a volatility index
          option, both on the VStoxx volatility index.780
   (894) Liffe offers 7 equity index options and 17 equity index futures on its central order
          book.781 These include futures on the national AEX, BEL20, CAC40, PSI-20 and FTSE
          100 indices, the FTSE 250 index, dividend futures on the AEX, CAC and FTSE, the
          FTSE Eurofirst 80 and 100 indices782, the FTSE Eurotop 100 index783, the MSCI
   779
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Email of
           4.06.2010 at 10:04, ENX-00855 -00001.
   780
           Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 13 September 2011, annex 4.
   781
           Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 13 September 2011, annex 4.Through BClear, it is
           possible to bring a total of 22 equity index options and 75 equity index futures into the exchange
           clearing environment.
   782
           The FTSEurofirst 80 index is a tradable index that covers the euro zone. The FTSEurofirst 100 index
           consists of the 60 largest companies ranked by market capitalisation in the FTSE Developed Europe
           Index and 40 additional companies selected for their size and sector representation. See
           http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/010/560/105607.pdf (viewed on 20 September 2011).
   783
           Designed to represent the performance of the 100 most highly capitalised blue chip companies in
           Europe.
EN                                                      208                                                     EN

         Europe and eurozone indices784, the Japanese TOPIX index, and two real estate indices.
         Options are offered on the AEX, BEL, CAC and FTSE.785
   (895) According to the Notifying Parties, in 2011, to date, there had been approximately
         77000 futures contracts in MSCI European sector indices entered in Bclear and no
         trading in the MSCI global indices.786
   (896) To date in 2011, there have been 5.6 million futures and 1.4 million options contracts
         traded in the Stoxx sector indices.
   (897) Given the IP rights associated with equity indices, Eurex and Liffe presently directly
         overlap in only the MSCI Japan index, where according to the Notifying Parties, Eurex
         achieved no volume to date in 2011.787
   (898) As a result, the Commission considers, in line with the market definition for European
         equity index derivatives, that the Notifying Parties do not compete in relation to
         existing European equity index derivatives. notified transaction would not lead to
         significant impediment of effective competition by elimination of actual and/or
         potential competition in respect of trading of national equity index derivatives in the
         Notifying Parties' home markets or derivatives based on pan-European indices, since, as
         set out in the market definition Section 11.1.1.2.2.2.3 above, these products belong to
         separate relevant product markets owing in particular to their being protected by IP
         rights.
   11.2.1.6.2.        Competition in product innovation
   (899) The Notifying Parties do, however, have a history of competing in new product
         launches in the area of trading and clearing of European equity indices. Third parties,
         such as Chi-X Europe in combination with Russell, also have concrete intentions to
         enter at least the pan-European segment of the market with new products.
   (900) The following examples illustrate historical competition between the Notifying Parties
         in European equity derivatives as well as innovation by them in this area.
                              11.2.1.6.2.1.     Eurostoxx vs Eurofirst
   (901) The first and most important example of competition between the Notifying Parties is
         competition in derivatives contracts based on pan-European indices. In 1998, Eurex
   784
           The MSCI Europe Index is a free float-adjusted market capitalisation weighted index that is designed to
           measure the equity market performance of developed markets in Europe, and consists of the following
           16 country indices: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, the
           Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. The MSCI euro
           index is similar in construction but excludes the non-members of the eurozone, i.e. Denmark, Norway,
           Sweden, Switzerland and the UK. MSCI is an independent global provider of indices and other
           financial                                          products                                        (see
           http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/MSCI/1407958773x0x453382/FE6BCA96-392F-417A-9A64-
           00D82DCCFF76/123837_017_BMK.PDF, viewed on 20 September 2011).
   785
           Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 13 September 2011, annex 4 .
   786
           Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 13 September 2011, p.8.
   787
           Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 13 September 2011, p.8.
EN                                                       209                                                       EN

         launched a contract based on the Eurostoxx index, which by the end of 1999 had
         already become a larger index than the German national DAX788. In 2003, NYX
         responded by launching the Eurofirst derivative contracts, co-created with the FTSE
         group, believing that the Eurostoxx contract was not appropriately designed and hoping
         that the new contract would attract more liquidity than the contracts on the
         Eurostoxx.789 According to LSE, Euronext competed with aggressive pricing and
         changed the clearing location to LCH Clearnet s.a. in 2007 to enable margin offset
         against AEX, CAC and BEL. After its launch, Eurofirst 80 peaked with c.100,000
         contracts in December 2008 but has since fallen back.790
   (902) While Eurofirst ultimately has not gained significant traction, this episode illustrates the
         competition in innovation. In 2010, Eurex achieved around […]*% of its turnover from
         indices alone, of which the Eurostoxx represents more than […]*791.
                              11.2.1.6.2.2.    Volatility index futures
   (903) In 2005, Eurex introduced volatility index futures, allowing investors to create pure
         volatility exposure or to hedge the volatility risks of equity market positions. The Vola
         Futures are based on the volatility indexes VSTOXX, VDAX-NEW, and VSMI,
         covering pan-European, German, and Swiss equity markets. In June 2009, it launched
         Vstoxx mini-futures.
   (904) This innovation was followed by Liffe in September 2006 with the launch of variance
         futures on the FTSE 100, AEX and DAX on Bclear792. In September 2007, it launched
         order-book trading in volatility index futures on AEX, CAC and BEL.793
                              11.2.1.6.2.3.    Index dividend futures
   (905) The Notifying Parties have also emulated each other in the launch of dividend futures
         on indices. Eurex was first to market, launching in June 2008 dividend futures on the
         Eurostoxx index794. In May 2009, Liffe responded with dividend futures on the FTSE
         100, and then in December 2009 on the CAC 40. AEX was added subsequently795. The
   788
           Stoxx News, 25 November 1999.
   789
           NYX' internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011 illustrates that the
           objective at the time was to "Win next battle on European derivatives; Eurostoxx 50: too narrow, room for
           another product". Pan-European Index Business case, Presentation to the Euronext Management Board, 18
           December 2002.
   790
           Follow-up Questions Following Meeting on 1 July 2011 with LSEG […]*.
   791
           Form CO, derivatives, Paragraph 6.242 and Annex D.19.
   792
           Presentation titled "Variance Futures", at www.euronext.com/fic/000/010/990/109901.ppt, viewed on
           21 September 2011.
   793
           Press       release       titled    "Euronext        to      launch       volatility      indices"     at
           http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/023/447/234473.pdf, viewed on 21 September 2011.
   794
           Press release titled "Eurex to Launch New Futures on Dividends of Dow Jones EURO STOXX 50",
           available athttp://www.eurexchange.com/about/press/press_577_en.html, viewed on 21 September
           2011.
   795
           http://globalderivatives.nyx.com/fr/stock-indices/nyse-liffe/dividend-index-futures, viewed on 21
           September 2011.
EN                                                        210                                                        EN

         millionth contract on FTSE 100 dividends was traded 10 months after its launch796.
         Eurex followed the launch of Eurostoxx futures with dividend futures on the DAX and
         the Swiss index, SMI797.
   (906) This competitive interaction between the Notifying Parties is discussed by DB in a
         presentation on "introduction of Options on Eurostoxx 50 Index Dividend Futures"
         dated 28.4.2010.
   11.2.1.6.3.      Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO
   (907) In response to the SO, the Notifying Parties raise four main points798:
   (908) Firstly, they argue that the Commission has based its conclusions on "three isolated and
         dated historical examples of derivatives product introductions" whereas it should have
         assessed likely future competitive effects. The Notifying Parties claim that "the market
         structure has changed so significantly since the time of the three examples cited in the
         SO that they cannot be used to draw reliable conclusions about future conduct".
   (909) Second, the Notifying Parties argue that "product innovation in equity indices is not
         driven by competition between exchanges – it originates with index providers and
         major bank customers in the OTC space" and that the incentives to innovate and create
         new indices will not change following the notified transaction.
   (910) Thirdly, the Notifying Parties argue that there are numerous existing and future
         competitors that are at least as significant – if not more significant – potential
         competitors in equity index derivatives as either NYX or DB.
   (911) Fourthly, the Notifying Parties argue that the Commission’s conclusions are in contrast
         to the responses of major market participants that do not consider that the notified
         transaction will lessen competition in innovation or new product introduction.
   11.2.1.6.4.      Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the SO
   (912) In response to the first point made by the Notifying Parties, it is incorrect to argue that
         the Commission based its preliminary conclusions in the SO purely on the examples
         given799; these were, as the name suggests, merely examples. By the very nature of
         innovation, the precise form it may take in the future is difficult to precisely predict.
   (913) In this regard, the issues in respect of innovation in equity indices are fundamentally no
         different than those which apply to innovation in all areas of the Notifying Parties'
         activities as set out in Section 11.2.1.2.5 and 11.2.1.3.3 above.
   796
           http://www.hedgeweek.com/2010/03/25/40434/ftse-100-dividend-index-futures-reach-one-million-
           milestone, viewed on 21 September 2011.
   797
           http://www.eurexchange.com/download/documents/publications/flyer_index_div_fut_en.pdf,    viewed
           on 21 September 2011.
   798
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Equity index derivatives, paragraph 2.
   799
           See paragraph 359 of the SO.
EN                                                       211                                                EN

   (914) In respect of the second point made by the Notifying Parties, it is similar in its reasoning
         to the arguments made in relation to innovation in the OTC space generally. These
         arguments have already been addressed at Recitals (589) et seq. above. To recapitulate,
         the innovation in question concerns the launching and establishment of a successful
         exchange traded contract, whether or not this has first been "incubated" OTC, as well as
         the timing and commercial terms on which this is offered to the market.
   (915) As regards the claim that innovation is carried out by index providers, and not by
         exchanges, this, as has been shown in Section 8.2.2 on index licensing above, does not
         accurately portray the competitive dynamics which pertain between exchanges on the
         one hand and index providers on the other.
   (916) Whilst it is true that index providers endeavour to develop indices which will be
         attractive to market users, they also depend for this purpose on the ability of exchanges
         to develop and maintain a liquid pool of trading in derivatives on the index in question.
         There is therefore a symbiotic relationship between the innovation of the index provider
         on the one hand and the innovation consisting in bringing derivatives on this index to
         the market, carried out by the exchange, on the other.
   (917) It is therefore not relevant to the competitive analysis whether indices are produced by
         the merged entity itself or by third parties which then would necessarily rely on the
         merged entity for distributing derivatives products on these indices, given the unique
         size and scope of the margin pool which it would have post-merger in a series of highly
         correlated European equity index derivatives. It should be noted that, while the
         Notifying Parties do not currently allow offsets between indices and single stock
         derivatives (though Eurex Clearing has concrete plans to do so in the near future), they
         do allow significant offsets between the highly correlated individual indices
         themselves.
   (918) The overwhelming competitive advantage which the merged entity would possess was
         underlined by the observation of Chi-X Europe at the Oral Hearing that "the merged
         entity will control the trading and clearing of 7 of the leading European equity
         indices… represent[ing] over 95% of the business in [European] index traded
         derivatives. A new entrant to [European] equity index derivatives would not be in a
         position to offer the same margin offsets and would consequently face a much higher
         hurdle to successful entry than is currently the case."800
   (919) Indeed, in this regard it should be noted that not only competition in innovation by the
         Notifying Parties would be adversely affected by the merger, but also that third parties
         (both index providers such as Russell and exchanges such as Chi-X Europe) might no
         longer have the means or incentive to innovate in this area post-merger, as they would
         face insurmountable barriers to entry given the combined margin pool of the merged
         entity and considering that the Notifying Parties would very likely be in a position to
         counter innovations from third parties with innovations of their own.
   (920) The third point raised by the Notifying Parties – the question of entry barriers into
         equity index derivatives – is also addressed in Section 11.2.1.7 below (see in particular
         Recitals (957) and (958)). High margin offsets apply on Eurex between the Eurostoxx
   800
           Chi-X Europe, presentation at Oral Hearing, 28 October 2011, [...]*.
EN                                                      212                                           EN

          and DAX contracts, and on Liffe between FTSE, AEX, BEL 20, CAC 40 and the
          Portuguese PSI index as well as with the Eurofirst ([>50%]*)801. All of these products
          would be part of a single margin pool post-merger, representing a formidable barrier to
          entry.
   (921) The Commission acknowledges that it is conceivable that, as the Notifying Parties
          argue, there exist some possible future innovations in the ETD index space for which
          other competitors may be as well placed as the Notifying Parties, in particular CME and
          NASDAQ OMX which have established US indices. However, the possible innovations
          in question do not concern European equity index derivatives. Given the established
          position of each of the Notifying Parties in European equity index derivatives, they are
          each other's closest competitor in this space.
   (922) In relation to the fourth point, whilst the Commission accepts that certain customers and
          competitors consulted during the market investigation did not expect an impact of the
          transaction on innovation, the overall conclusions based on the market investigation, on
          the Notifying Parties' internal documents, and on the history of competition between
          them, as set out in the various Sections 11.2.1.2.5 and 11.2.1.3.4 dealing with new
          product introduction above, all support the Commission's conclusion that innovation
          would be significantly negatively affected as a result of the notified transaction.
   (923) Within the European innovation space for equity indices thus defined, the Notifying
          Parties would have all the same advantages, and competitors suffer from all the same
          barriers to entry, as apply in European interest rates and European single stock
          derivatives.
   11.2.1.6.5.      Conclusion on European equity index futures and options
   (924) It follows from the analysis outlined in this Section that, owing to IP rights associated
          with equity index derivatives, Eurex and Liffe do not compete as concerns existing
          equity index derivatives. Similarly, they are not each other's potential competitors in
          this area.
   (925) However, Eurex and Liffe are each other's closest actual competitors in the area of
          bringing new European equity index products on the market. This competition would
          be eliminated post-merger. While there is another potential competitor with plans pre-
          merger to try to enter this market, Chi-X Europe, given the significant advantage of the
          merged entity which will control virtually all European equity index derivatives post-
          merger, it is unlikely that Chi-X Europe would be in a position to credibly constrain the
          merged entity in this area.
       11.2.1.7.BARRIERS TO ENTRY AND EXPANSION
   (926) According to the Horizontal Merger Guidelines, "when entering a market is sufficiently
          easy, a merger is unlikely to pose any significant anti-competitive risk. Therefore, entry
          analysis constitutes an important element of the overall competitive assessment. For
          entry to be considered a sufficient competitive constraint on the merging parties, it must
   801
            [>50%]* for the PSI.
EN                                                 213                                               EN

         be shown to be likely, timely and sufficient to deter or defeat any potential anti-
         competitive effects of the merger."802
   (927) In this case, the Commission analysed to what extent entry into the relevant derivatives
         markets concerned by this Decision would be likely, timely and sufficient in case anti-
         competitive effects were to materialise post-transaction. In this context, the
         Commission identified three main barriers to entry, two of which are generally
         applicable to all derivatives markets including those concerned by this Decision and
         one of which is specific to equity index derivatives.
   11.2.1.7.1. High barriers to entry and expansion into European equity and
       interest rate derivatives
                           11.2.1.7.1.1.     Introduction
   (928) The General Court has held that "the mere "threat" of an entry is not sufficient [...]
         What counts is the prospect of an entrant which offsets the anti-competitive effects
         specifically established in the contested decision at the stage of the assessment."803
   (929) Barriers to entry can be defined as features of the market, which give the incumbent
         firms an advantage over potential competitors804. In order to constitute a barrier to
         entry, it is therefore not necessary that this barrier entirely excludes competitors from
         the market. According to the Court of First Instance, barriers to entry "...may consist in
         elements of various natures, in particular economic, commercial or financial elements,
         which are likely to expose potential competitors of the established undertakings to risks
         and costs sufficiently high to deter them from entering the market within a reasonable
         time or to make it particularly difficult for them to enter the market, thus depriving
         them of the capacity to exercise a competitive constraint on the conduct of the
         established undertakings."805
   (930) It follows that the Commission has to establish that entry is not only a theoretical and
         remote possibility, but will be an immediate and actual threat for the merged entity,
         thereby exerting a competitive constraint on them to such an extent that they would
         refrain from any merger-induced anti-competitive behaviour806.
   (931) As will be outlined further in this Section, potential new entrants into the market for
         European exchange-traded derivatives are faced with high barriers to entry given the
         importance of liquidity and open interest and the related netting and cross-margining
         benefits. Furthermore, the possibility for competitors to offer equity index derivatives
         and thereby also gain a foothold in the related single equity derivatives products is also
         limited given that the benchmark index products are protected by intellectual property
         rights. The existence of a large installed base of existing users which "distributes" the
   802
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 68.
   803
           Case T-342/07, Ryanair Holdings v Commission, Judgment of 6 July 2010, Recital 239.
   804
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 70.
   805
           Case T-282/02 Cementbouw Handel & Industrie v Commission, [2006] ECR II-319, Recital 219
   806
           See Case COMP/M.4439 Ryanair / Aer Lingus, recital 547.
EN                                                     214                                          EN

         exchange's products to investors, characterised by unavoidable sunk connection costs, is
         also an important barrier to entry.
   (932) In the context of establishing liquidity and benefiting from related cross-margining
         possibilities, it is important to distinguish at the outset between entry into markets
         where an incumbent exchange has an established position; and entry into entirely new
         types of contracts which are not significantly correlated to the contracts of the
         incumbent. Where an incumbent exchange has an established position and runs a closed
         vertical silo model, barriers to entry are high given the stickiness of liquidity and the
         open interest in fungible or correlated contracts held in the incumbent's CCP. By
         contrast, in cases where new contracts are introduced which are not significantly
         correlated to the contracts of the incumbent, these entry barriers would be significantly
         lower while the user base might still play a role.
   (933) Indeed, contrary to what appears to be suggested by the Notifying Parties in their
         response to the SO, no competition concerns were identified by the Commission in
         respect of product innovation in completely new types of contracts (see Recital (560)
         above), that either have low correlation with existing contracts or constitute entirely
         new classes to which no or insignificant margin offsets are possible. These will
         therefore not be discussed further in this Section.
                           11.2.1.7.1.2.      General barrier: Open interest in fungible or correlated
                               contracts and cross-margining
   (934) Generally speaking, the higher the liquidity of a given platform in a given instrument,
         the more significant the advantage held by a trading venue since it will offer narrower
         bid-ask spreads, greater depth in the order book, and lower risk as regards the price at
         which a customer will be able to trade out of the same position in the future.
   (935) Furthermore, as the Notifying Parties have explained in the Form CO807, for traders that
         have open interest in one trading venue, collateral requirements for additional trades on
         the same venue can be lower because of netting and cross-margining opportunities
         (when calculating margin requirements across the user's portfolio of different products,
         risk correlations between different products are taken into account).
   (936) In their response to the decision opening the proceedings, the Notifying Parties claimed
         that liquidity – not access to cross-margining opportunities or cost of collateral –
         represents the principal reason why it is difficult to persuade traders to switch from a
         highly liquid to an illiquid trading venue, irrespective of whether the entrant offers
         significant cross-margining opportunities808.
   (937) In their Response to the SO, the Notifying Parties also consider that cross margining
         "advantages are not so large as to have a material deterrent effect on entry. All
         successful new entrants in the derivatives market have succeeded by offering genuinely
         innovative products that have utility for customers and represent an attractive value
   807
           Form CO, derivatives section, 6.181.
   808
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings, Competitive Assessment,
           paragraph 38.
EN                                                   215                                                EN

         proposition. History has shown that cross-margining benefits are not sufficient to deter
         or frustrate new entrants with such superior offerings". To sustain their position in the
         Response to the SO, the Notifying Parties frequently refer to the case of CDS
         derivatives. For example, they state that "ICE won the battle for CDS derivatives
         against the Parties, although it did not – in contrast to the Parties – have any
         meaningful presence in contracts other than energy and commodity contracts. These
         examples show that access to a large margin pool of correlated contracts is not a
         decisive factor to challenge another exchange".
   (938) The Commission notes that the CDS example upon which the Notifying Parties heavily
         rely to support their position that cross-margining is not a relevant barrier refers to an
         example of the introduction of a completely new product in the ETD space, with no
         prior liquidity or cross margining possibilities, that is to say a situation where all
         players start from a level playing field (in other words "Type III" innovation as defined
         above, involving the greenfield launch of new ETDs). This example is therefore not
         relevant in the context of this analysis809.
   (939) Indeed, on the basis of the evidence on the file, the Commission considers that cross
         margining does constitute an important element that constitutes an important barrier to
         entry as regards the derivatives markets which are the subject of this Decision.
   (940) First, as mentioned above, the Commission does not contest that cross margining
         benefits for completely new products (that is to say with no or limited margin offset
         possibilities with existing products) are not a determinant factor of success and
         therefore this argument does not need to be analysed further.
   (941) Second, the characteristic of derivatives markets whereby counterparty risk is managed
         for a significantly long period of time (as opposed to cash markets where settlement
         takes place within a few days of trading), means that the posting of collateral by users
         in derivatives markets can be significant, as can, therefore, the corresponding benefits
         of an efficient margining regime.
   (942) Third, the more significant the pool of open interest is in any given derivative contract,
         the more possibility there is of netting positions against each other so that collateral
         only needs to be posted against the net position810.
   (943) Fourth, the higher the open interest a customer has in a particular contract and within a
         given margin pool, and the closer the correlation between the contracts in question, the
         more significant are the cross margining possibilities that exist (on the assumption that
         the users holds a number of offsetting positions, which particularly characterizes the
         activity of dealers), leading to a decrease in the amount of collateral that needs to be
         posted by the user.
   809
           Although there might be a degree of correlation between certain CDS contracts and certain contracts of
           the Notifying Parties, it is unclear, for a variety of reasons including the nature and payoff of the
           underlying and supervisory considerations, whether this could or would lead to any significant margin
           offset. This seems not to have been an issue in Eurex's attempts to enter the CDS market. In any case,
           this example falls outside the scope of concerns outlined in this Decision.
   810
           Meaning that opposing trades in the same contract cancel each other out and thus eliminate collateral
           requirements. This is equivalent in collateral terms to 100% offset (but also avoids other fees).
EN                                                        216                                                     EN

   (944) Indeed, liquidity, netting and cross-margining are closely connected as both liquidity
         providers and liquidity takers would wish, all other things being equal, to trade on the
         platform where they already have open interest, either in the same contracts in order to
         be able to net positions or in similar contracts in order to be able to benefit from cross
         margining.
   (945) In this respect, Barclays states: "A key measure of an exchange's success as a new
         entrant in the derivatives trading space is quickly to establish meaningful open interest
         in a targeted set of contracts. Open interest attracts both buy-side and sell-side market
         participants to the exchange"811. The combination of both liquidity and open interest
         lowers the cost of trading, through netting and margin offsets between long and short
         positions on highly correlated products, which has been considered by a significant
         majority of customers as a crucial factor for new entry to be able to capture liquidity.
         As one customer puts it "as a minimum the new entrants would have to offer
         competitive pricing on execution fees and have open access into the relevant CCP for
         that instrument."812
   (946) This is also explained by Euro CCP, a CCP, that states that "[P]ortfolio level margining
         could bring substantial savings to clearing members by reducing the amount of
         collateral they need to post to the CCP without compromising risk management by
         offsetting correlated open positions in a clearing member’s obligations to the CCP"813.
   (947) There are therefore significant economies of scale and scope that occur in the clearing
         of derivatives, giving holders of large margin pools important advantages over potential
         competitors. It should be noted that the Notifying Parties implicitly acknowledge this
         advantage when discussing barriers to entry in the context of equity index derivatives as
         they argue that for a: "genuinely innovative equity index product" there is "no liquidity
         advantage and so open interest and netting do not provide any advantage"814. A
         contrario, this means that for existing products there is a liquidity advantage as well as
         an open interest and netting advantage for the incumbent.
   (948) Absent any cross-margining agreements or other clearing arrangements amongst CCPs,
         the clearing model currently prevailing in Europe for ETDs815, and for the Notifying
         Parties' derivatives exchanges in particular, is a model whereby only contracts traded on
         the exchanges' own trading venue are fungible amongst each other and where margin
         offsets are only possible between contracts traded on the exchanges' own trading
         venues. In other words, the incumbent exchanges do not provide access to their margin
         pools for contracts that are executed on a competing trading venue, nor do they allow
         their provider of clearing services to do so.
   811
           Barclays, response to Question 60 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase II [...]*.
   812
           Tullett Group, response to Question 60 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase II [...]*.
   813
           Minutes of conference call with EuroCCP on 2 September 2011 [...]*.
   814
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Booklet 5 (Equity Index Derivatives), paragraph 47. It should be
           noted that, whilst this is true, margin offset is still a significant factor for index derivatives, as
           mentioned at Recital (917) above and in the analysis of remedies below in Section 13.
   815
           As explained below, this model is different from the fully fungible model for the clearing of options in
           the US where the Options Clearing Corporation (OCC) clears fully fungible options traded on a number
           of exchanges.
EN                                                      217                                                         EN

   (949) It follows that a new entrant that would start offering a similar or the same contract (in
         terms of economic exposure) as the incumbent exchanges could not offer netting and
         cross-margining of these contracts with the same or similar contracts traded on the
         incumbent venues. Trading at the new entrant's exchange would therefore necessarily
         translate into higher margin requirements for its customers. This would necessarily
         have a deterrent effect on potential customers and could prevent them from either
         starting to trade a particular contract on the new entrant's platform or from switching
         from the incumbent to the new entrant's exchange. The market investigation has shown
         that this factor is typically a very considerable barrier to the establishment of liquidity
         on the competing platform.
   (950) In this respect, Nasdaq states that "it is generally difficult for a new entrant to capture
         liquidity in existing European instruments due to the “open interest issue” (i.e.
         customers wanting to open and close out positions on one and the same platform in
         order to benefit from offsetting of margins)".816 LSE concurs, considering that "open
         interest pools and lack of margin off-set act as significant barriers to entry that do not
         exist in cash equity markets" describing it as "the most significant barrier to entry is
         having access to a clearing pool which will enable customers to maintain open interest
         in an efficient manner, which means having a sufficiently material pool of open interest
         to enable efficient offsetting of initial margin"817. This is also the position of Chi-X
         Europe, which at the Oral Hearing contrasted derivatives markets to cash markets,
         stating that "the existence of “stickier” liquidity and the importance of cross-margining
         and open interest in derivatives means that customers cannot quickly or easily shift
         liquidity between platforms."818 AFME, the Association for Financial Markets in
         Europe, representing a significant number of customers of exchanges (such as brokers
         and banks), stated at the Oral Hearing that "since derivatives positions are held for
         significantly longer than in cash equities, the cost of financing margin requirements is a
         far more material – in fact dominant, component of the all-in cost of trading819".
   (951) This is also reflected in DB's internal documents where it is stated that "greenfield
         market entry for benchmark products is almost impossible"820 and by the statement of a
         customer of one of the Notifying Parties, who specified that "only if the clearing
         arrangements are open (as with the OCC in the US or with some open licensing
         agreement to clear copyrighted indices) can a new exchange be credible when trying to
         challenge an incumbent."821
   (952) In the trading and clearing model operated by the Notifying Parties, it is the trading
         venue that creates a market for the trading of its own derivatives contracts822 and
         controls the open interest in the contracts. The effect of owning the contract on the
   816
           Nasdaq OMX, response to question 54 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors on derivatives, Phase II
           [...]*.
   817
           LSE, response to question 26 and 46 of Q10 - Questionnaire to competitors on derivatives – Phase II
           [...]*.
   818
           "Chi-X Europe’s Perspective", Speaking Notes at Oral Hearing of 28 October 2011, slide 8, [...]*.
   819
           AFME, written comments, Oral Hearing, 28 October 2011, [...]*.
   820
           See DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011[…]*.
   821
           BNP Paribas Arbitrage, response to question 51 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   822
           This is in contrast to a cash exchange which serves as a venue for the trading of products offered by
           issuing companies. Since MiFID, securities can be admitted to trading on Regulated Markets/MTFs
           regardless of the venue on which they are listed.
EN                                                       218                                                     EN

         likelihood of new entrants being successful is illustrated in DB's internal documents:
         "At least with derivatives, the exchanges actually do own the contracts being traded
         and so it is much harder for newcomers to wrestle liquidity in these instruments away
         from the incumbents."823
   (953) The fact that access to an incumbent's margin pool could facilitate entry of trading
         platforms is clearly demonstrated by DB's internal documents: […]*.824
   (954) The difference between entry into those derivatives markets where there is the
         possibility for several platforms to access the same pool of open interest and those
         markets where a vertical silo model prevails is well illustrated by looking at US options
         and futures. For US options, the OCC operates a model where there is one common
         clearing pot, whereby the nine member exchanges are able to offset their open interest
         in that pot against all the correlated positions of the other member exchanges allowing
         for competition at the level of the exchanges. New entrants (including NYSE Liffe
         US825) have not only been able to enter but have been able to obtain significant market
         shares826. This clearing model does not apply to US futures. For US financial futures, it
         is observed that nearly all liquidity concentrates on a single exchange, CME. CME runs
         a closed vertical silo which does not allow for any offsetting of positions with other
         futures exchanges.
   (955) In the markets affected by the notified transaction, namely European interest rate
         derivatives and European single stock derivatives, the vast majority of liquidity is
         established on the Notifying Parties' platforms and the corresponding open interest is
         held in the CCPs controlled by the Notifying Parties.
   (956) The Notifying Parties' offering of trade registration, confirmation and clearing of block
         and flexible versions of European equity futures and options (as described in Sections
         11.2.2 and 11.2.3) which are cleared in the same margin pool as ETDs traded on the
         order book further increases the size of the margin pools held by the Notifying Parties.
   (957) The same can be said for the margin pools held by the Notifying Parties as concerns
         equity indices, where the Notifying Parties hold some of the most significant indices
         based on European underlyings. In this context, the Notifying Parties have in their
         Response to the SO argued that cross margining is relevant in "only very limited
         circumstances" and that in this area it is not a barrier to entry, offering the example of
         the ICE offering of the Russell 2000 equity index. The Commission notes, however,
         that the ICE example relates to an index on US and not European underlyings, as ICE
         has explicitly stated827 and that, in any event, merely offering an index does not mean
         that barriers to entry are low. As discussed at Recitals (920) to (922) above relating to
         new equity index products, such barriers to entry due to the established market position
   823
           See DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011[…]*.
   824
           See DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011:"[…]*.
   825
           See NYSE website, available at http://www.nyse.com/press/1238667419972.html, viewed on 5
           December 2011.
   826
           OCC, agreed minutes of a meeting of 1 September 2011 [...]*. Indeed, DB itself acknowledges the
           "intense competition in US options business", DB Internal Document, […]*.
   827
           ICE, response to questionnaire Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors – Phase II. ICE stated that "ICE has
           no offerings in European equity indices", [...]*.
EN                                                        219                                                     EN

         and existing margin pool of highly correlated products of the Notifying Parties are in
         fact considerable828.
   (958) Additionally, the barrier to entry in single stock derivatives resulting from the pool of
         open interest and liquidity in index products – the "gravitational effect" referred to
         elsewhere by NYX829 – is not only related to possible margin offsets but also to the
         desire of certain market participants to trade the index and some of the component
         underlying derivatives (as well as the index and the component cash equities) together.
   (959) In this regard, Nasdaq OMX states that "as the Commission rightly noted in the
         Statement of Objections, traders often implement trading strategies covering a number
         of single stock equity derivatives within one country. Traders of derivatives on single
         stocks listed in a given country, like mutual funds, will within their portfolio risk
         management strategy want to hedge the general market volatility risk associated with
         the relevant stocks by taking opposite positions in derivatives on an index that mirrors
         this market risk… The fund manager will want to trade the index derivative on the same
         exchange as the single stock derivatives to benefit from collateral savings through cross
         margining of correlated contracts…. A derivatives exchange unable to offer such highly
         liquid benchmark index derivatives will therefore not be appealing to traders, neither
         for the trading of index derivatives nor, as part of an overall portfolio risk management
         strategy, for the trading of single stock derivatives relating to the index derivative"830.
   (960) The Notifying Parties' combined offering of both STIR and LTIR products on European
         underlyings that would result from the transaction, would also lead to a increase in the
         margin pool of closely correlated assets on which unrivalled cross-margining
         opportunities could be offered.
   (961) Therefore the Notifying Parties could offer cross-margining for new contracts with
         correlated contracts in which open interest already exists, whereas new entrants (or
         those with open interest in less correlated contracts, such as commodities or US interest
         rate derivatives) would not have such possibilities.
   (962) In this respect, the London Stock Exchange states that: "Currently, a new entrant has to
         contend with two split pools of open interest and the chances of it getting some
         comparable scale are therefore marginally better than if a new entrant were faced with
         one monolithic open interest pool, at which point these chances would be eradicated -
         there would be no incentive for trading participants to use the new entrant's pool when
         they already have all their open interest in one single venue".831
   (963) Finally, in their submission of 1 December 2011 in the context of the remedies offered,
         the Notifying Parties argue that the example of the Battle of the Bund used by the
         Commission in the SO does not support the Commission's argument in relation to the
         importance of the margin pool to competition. However, this comparison is
         inappropriate, since the Commission is not required to show that this barrier to entry
   828
           On correlation between index products generally see also Recital (1371) of this Decision.
   829
           See, for example, Recital (829) of this Decision.
   830
           Nasdaq OMX, Comments on the SO at pages 8 and 9 and comments at the Oral Hearing, 28 October
           2011, [...]*.
   831
           LSE Response to question 55 of Q10 – Questionnaire to Competitors, Phase II [...]*.
EN                                                       220                                            EN

         was decisive at all points in the past, even under very different market circumstances,
         but rather to assess those barriers to entry which currently exist and can reasonably be
         predicted to continue to exist within the timeframe of the Commission's assessment832.
   (964) Therefore, it is concluded that the markets concerned by the notified transaction, namely
         European interest rate and equity derivatives, are characterised by high barriers to entry
         in that the netting and cross-margining benefits available to incumbent and closed
         clearing margin pools, give incumbent firms considerable advantages over rival trading
         platforms.
                            11.2.1.7.1.3.       Certain popular derivatives contracts are protected by IP
                                 rights: case of equity index derivatives
   (965) The Notifying Parties explain in the Form CO that indices are proprietary, trademarked
         products, most of which are generally licensed by their owners to only a single
         derivatives exchange.833
   (966) As already indicated in Section 8.1.2 on the index licensing market above, the most
         important equity index derivatives offered by Eurex are based on the EURO STOXX
         50 and DAX indices.834 Eurex has licensed trademarks for the EURO STOXX 50 from
         its affiliate STOXX and for DAX indices from DB. The most important equity index
         derivatives offered by Liffe are based on the CAC 40 and AEX, as well as the FTSE
         100 for Liffe835. Liffe holds trademarks in the AEX, BEL 20, CAC 40, and PSI 20
         indices and Liffe is a non-exclusive licensee of the trademarks to the FTSE 100 and
         other FTSE indices (which are licensed from FTSE, which is owned by the LSE and the
         Financial Times).
   (967) The possibilities for entry in equity index derivatives appear to be hindered by
         intellectual property (IP) rights in addition to the general barriers to entry linked to
         access to open interest described above and that are applicable to interest rate, single
         stock equity derivatives and equity index derivatives. The Notifying Parties explained
         in their response to the decision opening the proceedings836, that although the notified
         transaction will bring these indices under common ownership, it will not have any
         effect on the pre-existing situation in respect of either Party's incentives to license its
         indices, as neither Party today has an incentive to license its indices to other exchanges.
   (968) Equity index derivatives are among the most traded derivatives products in Europe. In
         particular, Eurostoxx 50 derivatives are the most popular and liquid contracts in
         Europe. 77% of Equity index options and 85% of Equity index futures traded at Eurex
         are based on the Eurostoxx 50 index.
   (969) Internal documents show that […]*% of Eurex sales revenue is from European index
         trading.837 These data are consistent with the market perception of the importance of
   832
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 9.
   833
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 7.53.
   834
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 7.53.
   835
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 7.53.
   836
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening proceedings, paragraph 48.
   837
           DB Internal document, .[…]*.
EN                                                       221                                              EN

         these indices: described by the customer association AFME as "the market
         standard"838, whilst according to LSE, the Eurostoxx 50 "contracts are one of the most
         liquid European index derivatives, alone accounting for approximately 60% of all
         exchange-traded index contracts"839.
   (970) Given their popularity and the correlation with European single stock derivatives as well
         as the desire on the part of customers to trade these products together, the inability to
         obtain a licence to list derivatives on these benchmark indices may also make it
         uneconomical to attempt entry into the neighbouring single stock derivatives markets.
   (971) This is illustrated by BATS, which specifies that: "Being able to trade a contract that
         was fully fungible with existing open interest at a clearing level, costs the same to clear
         as a Eurex or Liffe trade and was not exposing our trading platform or our customers
         to any IP risk would create an opportunity where trading activity could be initiated on
         rival platforms. This trading activity would attract a wider range of market participants
         which in turn may allow that platform to launch new products".840
   (972) In the same vein, TOM states that "Financial instruments based on an index or indices
         have become very popular in the market in the aftermath of the financial crisis in 2008.
         These products are expected to stay very liquid in the coming time. Consequently, the
         offering of indices products are material to the success and chances of success of any
         new entrant including TOM. Therefore, it is of utmost importance, that new market
         operators are not unfairly blocked from trading derivatives products based on indices
         of its own markets and relating to other markets. This would stifle the competition
         between exchanges and be detrimental to further product innovation and to achieving
         the MiFID goals of an integrated market by encouraging more competition between
         exchanges and in the end better investor protection as it is detrimental to the interests
         of investors and ensuring best execution."841
   (973) This is in line with the entry undertaken by Eurex itself into the single equity space in
         particular with French, Dutch and UK single equities, amply documented above in
         Section 11.2.1.5., where Eurex entered first with the single equities underlying its
         Eurostoxx 50 product and later expanded to the full Eurostoxx 600.
   (974) In their response to the decision opening the proceedings, the Notifying Parties submit
         that all the benchmark index contracts can in any event be economically replicated with
         look-alike products, so any prospective entrant which can offer a unique value
         proposition is today in a position to win liquidity. In this respect, BATS, however,
         stated that "It is likely that NYSE Euronext / Deutsche Börse would challenge the IP on
         a lookalike product"842.
   (975) In the same vein, Nasdaq OMX highlighted that "The launch of derivatives on an
         identical replication of an index without a license would raise IPR issues. Derivatives
         on a similar new index are unlikely to attract significant liquidity. Derivatives on a
   838
           AFME, written comments, at Oral Hearing,paragraph 27, [...]*.
   839
           LSE, response to question 14 of Q3 – Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   840
           BATS, response to question 76 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase II [...]*.
   841
           TOM, response to question 76 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase II [...]*.
   842
           BATS, response to question 157 of Q3 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase I [...]*.
EN                                                     222                                           EN

         look-alike index that does not have the same design/construction as the established
         index are not substitutable with derivatives on the established index from the demand
         side point of view. For this reason customers will be even more unwilling to shift
         liquidity away from the incumbent than they already would be because of the open
         interest issue if the competing exchange offered a product that is identical with the
         contract traded on the incumbent"843.
   (976) Moreover, even when a license can be obtained, as has been possible for Turquoise to
         the FTSE 100 index which is the only index of those traded by the Notifying Parties in
         which they do not own or control the IP, as explained below this is not necessarily
         sufficient to attract significant liquidity onto the alternative platform: fungibility and/or
         at least margin offset may be required.
   (977) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that barriers to entry in European
         equity index derivatives are particularly high because the popular equity indices are IP
         protected and, with the exception of the FTSE, the IP is controlled by the Notifying
         Parties who have made clear they have no incentive to, and would not, license these
         indices to competing exchanges. Any replication of indices would be difficult and
         susceptible to be legally challenged. Given the popularity and the correlation with
         European single stock derivatives and desire of customers to trade these together, the
         inability to obtain a licence to list derivatives on these benchmark indices may also
         deter entry into these neighbouring markets.
                            11.2.1.7.1.4.      Membership base
   (978) In addition to the two main barriers described above, another significant barrier to enter
         the markets for European equity and interest rate derivatives is the need to build up an
         installed base of users acting as a "distribution network" of the Notifying Parties
         products to end investors, which in the case of these markets is the venues' membership
         base. Both Notifying Parties have a large membership base consisting of customers
         who trade European equity and interest rate derivatives. These members have – and
         need to have – a connection in place with the Notifying Parties and have incurred the
         necessary sunk and ongoing costs to do so. Therefore new contracts added on the
         platform directly reach all members of the exchange.
   (979) The Notifying Parties in their Response to the SO contest that membership bases are a
         relevant barrier to entry, in particular referring to "two recent major races for attracting
         liquidity in new products (credit default swaps and carbon emissions) that were won"
         by platforms other than Liffe or Eurex844. In that same paragraph of their response to
         the SO, they also allege that it would be straightforward and easy to join another
         exchange and that the Commission has ignored the "success that exchanges such as
         ELX or NYSE Liffe U.S., which started from scratch have had in the U.S".
   (980) The Notifying Parties fail to address, however, the fact that new entrants would need to
         spend time and make significant investments to build up an effective distribution base
         via a critical mass of membership and that these customers would need to incur sunk
   843
           Nasdaq OMX, response to question 79 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase II: [...]*.
   844
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Equity Index Derivatives, paragraph 103.
EN                                                       223                                            EN

         costs associated with developing and setting up connectivity with the new entrant's
         platform without any guarantee at all that the new venue will be successful, a situation
         which is in marked contrast to that of ELX and NYSE Liffe US which clear through the
         OCC and FICC, open access utilities.
   (981) Indeed these costs have been considered as a relevant barrier for new entrants by a
         number of players during the market investigation. For example, one respondent notes
         that "there are no other participants with anything like the existing customer
         distribution, (technology and network distribution, customer lists, trading agreements),
         which means that any new players would be playing catch-up for many years."845 By
         way of comparison, it should be noted that Liffe has more than […]* members846,
         whilst TOM has a handful of […]* members and that according to public information,
         Turquoise has only 39 members.847
   (982) These elements also apply to platforms active in other asset classes as such platforms
         would also need to first build up a relevant membership base (customers who trade
         commodities derivatives, for example, are usually not the same customers as those
         trading equity and interest rate derivatives).
   (983) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that membership base and
         associated distribution network constitutes a barrier to entry into European derivatives
         markets, especially for de novo players.
   11.2.1.7.2. Historical attempts at entry into European exchange traded equity and
       interest rate futures and options
   (984) The Notifying Parties have argued throughout the procedure that derivatives markets are
         dynamic and that successful cash MTFs such as BATS, Chi-X Europe and Turquoise as
         well as the alternative trading operator TOM are likely entrants in derivatives markets
         and that sophisticated customers enjoying buyer power could also sponsor such
         entry.848 However, entry into European equity and interest rates futures and options is
         difficult as entrants face the inherent competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis incumbents
         which derives mainly from the absence of access to open interest held by the Notifying
         Parties in correlated contracts and to the margin pool of the incumbents, as analysed in
         detail above in Section 11.2.1.7.1.2. Indeed the Notifying Parties have failed to point to
         any historical instances in the interest rate, single equity and equity indices market
         where successful or even significant entry has taken place.
                             11.2.1.7.2.1.      Customer-sponsored entry – project Rainbow
   (985) Throughout the procedure, the Notifying Parties have claimed that their largest
         derivatives customers (major banks and large trading firms) exercise strong buyer
   845
           ICAP, reply to question 31 of Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II [...]*.
   846
           This relates to the full list of members and includes instances where there are several entities from the
           same group.
   847
           See Turquoise website, available at http://www.tradeturquoise.com/tq_members.shtml, last viewed on
           25 January 2011.
   848
           Form CO, Derivatives, section 7.
EN                                                       224                                                         EN

         power by virtue of the very real prospect that they will sponsor the entry of new
         competitors849. In this regard, the Notifying Parties state that "because they control the
         vast majority of the liquidity in the derivatives marketplace, these banks are in a
         position to guarantee liquidity to MTFs and have an incentive to route transactions
         through MTFs and, in the future, OTFs, in which they have a financial interest".850 The
         Notifying Parties argue that such sponsored new entrants could be existing derivatives
         trading venues, which can be helped to list new product categories, or simply de novo
         entrants (either owned by the Notifying Parties' customers or receiving assurances of
         trading volumes from the Notifying Parties' customers).
   (986) In their Response to the SO, the Notifying Parties851 offer the example of the recent
         selection of "an organized venue to trade and clear CDS" as exemplifying the "banks’
         ability to direct liquidity to their own sponsored platforms… after ICE agreed to give
         dealers an equity stake and a share of clearing revenues".
   (987) Once again, the Commission notes that this refers to an example of introduction of a
         completely new product in the OTC space with little relevant correlation with the
         existing products of the Notifying Parties and therefore with no prior liquidity or cross
         margining possibilities, that is a situation where all players started from a level playing
         field. This example can therefore be clearly rejected for the purposes of this analysis as
         it refers to "Type III" innovation or greenfield entry as defined in Section 11.2.1.2.5
         above.
   (988) The example of a failed venture a few years ago, the so-called Project Rainbow, is more
         relevant in the current context. It shows that without the ability to offset margins with
         contracts traded on the incumbent derivatives exchanges, entry is unlikely to be
         successful. That is, the same barriers to entry apply irrespective of the nature of the new
         entrant and past attempts at sponsored entry show that entering derivatives markets is
         subject to substantial hurdles mainly relating to access to a margin pool of correlated
         contracts.
   (989) In 2007, a consortium of banks and derivatives trading firms undertook a venture to
         launch a new trading platform for financial futures. Project Rainbow participants
         approached LCH.Clearnet with a proposal to clear contracts traded on the platform that
         would be fungible and would therefore be offset against the open interest in similar
         Liffe contracts, which were already being cleared by LCH.Clearnet. Liffe entered into
         negotiations with LCH.Clearnet following which LCH.Clearnet decided to reject
         Project Rainbow's proposal. Subsequently, in October 2008, LCH and Liffe announced
         the creation of LiffeClear with an exclusive ring-fenced pool of open interest available
         only to LiffeClear. The view from market participants was that faced with a resulting
         inability to offer fungible contracts and gain access to LiffeClear's open interest, Project
         Rainbow failed and was subsequently wound down in 2008.852 853
   849
           Form CO, Derivatives, section 7.7.
   850
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraph 22.
   851
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraph 22.
   852
           [...]*.
   853
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Chi-X Europe of 18 August 2011, paragraph 13 [...]*.
EN                                                       225                                                 EN

   (990) In their response to the decision opening the proceedings, the Notifying Parties claim
         that the establishment of LiffeClear in 2009 was not connected to the announcement of
         Project Rainbow in 2007, and that LiffeClear was not formed to frustrate competition
         from Project Rainbow. Regardless of the reasons for the creation of LiffeClear, the
         failure of Project Rainbow was linked to the clearing arrangements which prevented
         netting and cross-margining positions in equivalent contracts traded on different
         exchanges. As explained by [one large customer]*: "Project Rainbow aimed to create
         an efficient platform on which to trade futures and options that will compete directly
         with incumbent F&O exchanges which have a monopoly in their product sets, and offer
         significantly lower transaction fees. In the first phase the products launched were
         intended to compete with LIFFE (predominantly STIR products), with future phases
         planned for products to compete with EUREX and ICE Major impediment to the project
         was clearing - the arrangements between Liffe and LCH, and the in-house clearing
         arrangements of ICE / Eurex, prevented clients netting and cross-margining their
         positions in equivalent contracts traded on different exchanges."854 Similarly, Chi-X
         Europe explained that the main reason the Rainbow consortium did not succeed despite
         18 months of development was the lack of fungibility in clearing.855
   (991) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties do not address the Commission's
         analysis of Project Rainbow in the SO.
   (992) Responses from the Notifying Parties' customers have further emphasised that
         ultimately, the failure of any such customer-sponsored initiatives was due to exclusive
         links between exchanges and their clearing-houses. For instance, the Kyte Group stated
         "We have been approached by other exchanges who were seeking support for new
         lookalike products and a few years ago we were approached by an MTF ("Altex") that
         wanted to compete directly with Liffe but they failed to succeed because of the exclusive
         nature of the clearing house arrangements with the exchange".856
   (993) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that without access to a margin
         pool of correlated contracts it is very unlikely that a new entrant, even one in which
         exchange customers participate or sponsor, could successfully enter derivatives trading
         in products which the merging parties hold the vast majority, if not all, of the liquidity
         and open interest.
                              11.2.1.7.2.2.     Entry by cash MTFs (example of Turquoise Derivatives)
   (994) The difficulties associated with entering derivatives markets are well illustrated by the
         recent attempted entry by LSE through its Turquoise Derivatives platform. Having been
         refused a licence to Eurostoxx by Stoxx Ltd, a member of the DB group (see above),
         Turquoise Derivatives entered the market in June 2011 with a FTSE 100 futures
         contract, an equivalent of which is also traded on Liffe.857 Turquoise Derivatives uses
         LCH.Clearnet as its clearing services provider for derivatives traded on its platform.
   854
           [...]*, response to question 66 of Q8 – questionnaire to customers, Phase II, [...]*.
   855
           Chi-X Europe, agreed minutes of a teleconference call of 18 August 2011 [...]*.
   856
           Kyte Group Limited, response to question 65 of Q8 – questionnaire to customers, Phase II, [...]*.
   857
           LSE, response to question 60 of Q3 – Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
EN                                                        226                                                EN

   (995) In theory, Turquoise's product should appear to be attractive to customers since it uses
         the latest generation trading system SOLA, combines cash and derivatives trading and
         offers a significantly lower per transaction headline trading and clearing fee compared
         to that charged by Liffe.858 With the aim of rendering itself more attractive to
         customers, Turquoise requested from Liffe margin offset with FTSE 100 contracts and
         other correlated contracts cleared by and traded on Liffe.859 However, Liffe refused the
         Turquoise request for both fungibility and initial margin offsets.860
   (996) As a result, Turquoise appears to be facing significant problems in building up liquidity
         on its platform, with only approximately a total of only 3,800 contracts having been
         traded since June 2011 to November 2011861 (as compared to more than 32.5 million
         contracts in 2011 (up to 31st October) for Liffe862).
   (997) In the SO, the Commission set out that the reasons for this very limited liquidity on the
         Turquoise platform was due to the reluctance of potential customers to switch to
         Turquoise's platform motivated by the lack of possibility to offset positions traded on
         Turquoise with their open positions in the FTSE 100 derivatives traded through Liffe's
         incumbent platform863.
   (998) The Notifying Parties argued in their response to the decision opening the proceedings
         that "it is always easy for a potential competitor to claim that access to the margin pool
         of an incumbent is a prerequisite for successful competition". They argued that this "is
         usually a smokescreen for the fact that the new entrant does not have a convincing
         value proposition for customers". In the specific case of Turquoise, the Notifying
         Parties argue that the reason for not attracting liquidity is not because it lacks access to
         Liffe's open interest, but rather because it is offering a 'me too' product864. The
         Notifying Parties also contend in their Response to the SO that the Commission has
         relied only on statements of LSE (the owner of Turquoise) and that the market
         investigation does not support the Commission's findings. They cite only one customer,
         [...]*, in that the lower fees charged are “not sufficient to compensate for the poor
         liquidity…” as evidence that the only barrier is liquidity and that a "copy cat" product
         cannot be successful given that it would lead to split liquidity.
   (999) In fact, a number of customers consulted during the market investigation noted that the
         contracts offered by Turquoise and Liffe provide for identical economic exposure and
         specified that the fees charged by Turquoise are significantly lower than those charged
         by Liffe. Indeed, according to AFME "its product is 66% cheaper across headline
         trading and clearing fees up to 100 lots"865. Nevertheless, Turquoise is not considered
         as an alternative due to the inability to obtain margin offsets with trades on other
         platforms. For instance, the customer cited by the Notifying Parties themselves, [one
         large customer]* stated "Contracts are the same but not fungible, therefore introducing
   858
           LSE, response to question 60 of Q3 – Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   859
           LSE, response to question 14 of Q3 – Questionnaire to competitors [...]*.
   860
           Letter from NYSE to Turquoise dated Friday 8 April 2011.
   861
           See                   Turquoise                   website,                 available            at
           http://www.tradeturquoise.com/doclibrary/derivatives_stats_ytd.pdf, viewed on 03 December 2011.
   862
           See Euronext website, available at http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/067/598/675986.xls.
   863
           See SO, paragraph 435.
   864
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening proceedings, paragraph 41.
   865
           AFME, written comments, at Oral Hearing, 28 October 2011, paragraph 24, [...]*.
EN                                                       227                                                  EN

         basis risk. We would give serious consideration to trading on Turquoise if the contracts
         were to become fungible. Fees are less on Turquoise but the saving is not sufficient to
         compensate for the poor liquidity, basis risk and margining inefficiency"866.
   (1000) This clearly shows the difficulties that a player without an open interest where it can
         benefit from significant cross margining possibilities has to be able to overcome in
         order to become an effective competitor. In this context, AFME has also stated that "the
         headline clearing or margining costs on Liffe do not reflect the margin benefits
         available to market participants with positions already open in the product on Liffe…
         and so the limited volumes in Turquoise products do not enable clients to reliably to
         achieve any material margin offsets"867.
   (1001) Furthermore, the low likelihood of Turquoise successfully entering the market is also
         reflected in NYX's internal documents:[…]*868 […]*.869
   (1002) Another example of recent entry, by TOM into the Dutch equity derivatives market,
         has been discussed in Section 11.2.1.5.3.3 above.
   (1003) In addition to barriers related to clearing and index licensing, the Notifying Parties
         themselves discuss in internal documents the difficulty for MTFs to enter successfully
         the derivatives space with new products. "For [the MTFs] to be successful in [new]
         derivative products requires heavy investments in research, product development and
         marketing - functions they have not focused on historically".870
   (1004) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that new entrants such as MTFs
         wishing to establish themselves in the derivatives space face very significant barriers to
         entry which would lead to a low likelihood of entry, in insufficient scope and would not
         occur in a timely and sustained manner.
   11.2.1.7.3.      The prospect of sufficient and timely post-merger entry is unlikely
   (1005) Barriers to enter the markets for exchange-traded European equity and interest rate
         derivatives are already very high today. These high barriers mean that entry is not only
         difficult as demonstrated by various failed attempts, but to the extent that it were to
         occur, any entrant would be unlikely to gain traction and sufficient liquidity in these
         instruments within a reasonable timeframe. As a result, it is unlikely that any entry
         would give rise to a player having the ability to sufficiently constrain the merged entity
         and discipline its market behaviour.871 Indeed, these high barriers to entry, illustrated by
   866
          [...]*, question 69 of Q8 - Questionnaire to customers, Phase II [...]*.
   867
          AFME, written comments, at Oral Hearing, 28 October 2011paragraph 24, [...]*.
   868
          The counter referred to can be found in NYX internal document: Memo with date April 14, 2011 to
          […]* from […]* with title Re: FTSE 100 Index Futures - Turquoise response, Reference ENX - 00021
          – 00001 and can be summarised as follows: […]*.
   869
          NYX internal document: Memo with date April 14, 2011 to […]* from […]* with title Re: FTSE 100
          Index Futures - Turquoise response, Reference ENX - 00021 - 00001. A similar internal document
          regarding the same Turquoise action states that "[…]* (NYX internal document from April 2011:
          Memo on FTSE 100 index futures - Turquoise Response ENX – 00262).
   870
          See DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011 […]*.
   871
          Respondents have also pointed to the fact that barriers to entry may increase as a result of the merger. In
          this respect, the London Stock Exchange states that: "Currently, a new entrant has to contend with two
EN                                                       228                                                          EN

          a number of failed attempts, make it all the more likely that the competitive harm
          resulting from the notified transaction would materialise post-merger.
   (1006) Given that the barriers to enter in these markets are exogenous, this analysis remains
          valid even if the merged entity were to attempt to exercise market power. Indeed, it is
          unlikely that any such attempt would incentivize new entrants to enter or increase their
          chances for success. If anything, such entry will become more difficult post-merger as
          the new entrant would have to face even larger margin pool of the merged
          entity.Therefore, the Commission considers it unlikely that sufficient and timely entry
          would take place post-merger to mitigate the anti-competitive effects of the notified
          transaction.
   11.2.1.7.4.       Conclusion
   (1007) As demonstrated in this section, barriers to entry into European financial derivatives
          markets and the markets for European interest rate and equity derivatives are extremely
          high and have been historically difficult to overcome. This is evidenced by failed
          attempt at entry in the past and the duopolistic market structure where Eurex and Liffe
          are the only credible competitors.
   (1008) It follows that it is unlikely that the anticompetitive effects stemming from the
          proposed transaction could be counteracted by a timely and sufficient entry post-
          merger.
       11.2.1.8.THE MERGING PARTIES' CUSTOMERS                   HAVE NO COUNTERVAILING BUYER POWER
                  AND NO POSSIBILITIES OF SWITCHING SUPPLIERS
   (1009) In their response to the decision opening the proceedings, the Notifying Parties
          claimed that their biggest customers enjoy significant buyer power which would
          discipline the merged entity's behaviour post-merger.872 In their response to the SO, the
          Notifying Parties claimed, citing an ISDA report, that the vast majority of derivatives
          are held by 14 dealers. According to the Notifying Parties, these dealers are major
          banks and "make far larger profits in OTC trading than they make serving as brokers
          for exchange trades, so they have a strong incentive to route their customers’
          transactions to their own platforms, as well as to conduct their own substantial OTC
          derivatives trading on their own platforms"873.
            split pools of open interest and the chances of it getting some comparable scale are therefore
            marginally better than if a new entrant were faced with one monolithic open interest pool, at which
            point these chances would be eradicated - there would be no incentive for trading participants to use
            the new entrant's pool when they already have all their open interest in one single venue": LSE
            Response to question 55, Q10 – Questionnaire to Competitors, Phase II [...]*. BATS also claims that
            "the merger is likely to increase the barriers to entry as the merged entity will have no incentive to
            provide access to clearing, as it will control approximately 90% of the ETD margin pool in Europe and
            thus will be shielded from competition and would control how and at which speed entry may occur. As
            providing access would allow for such competition, the merged entity would have no interest to grant
            such access": BATS, agreed minutes of meeting on 26 August 2011 [...]*.
   872
            Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 7.7.
   873
            Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Introduction, paragraph 20.
EN                                                         229                                                     EN

   (1010) The Notifying Parties then claimed that these major banks/OTC derivatives dealers
         "often own or back the MTFs that compete with the Parties' exchanges" and that
         because "they control the vast majority of the liquidity in the derivatives marketplace,
         these banks are in a position to guarantee liquidity to MTFs and have an incentive to
         route transactions through MTFs and, in the future, OTFs, in which they have a
         financial interest". The position of the Notifying Parties is, as set out in Section
         11.1.1.2.2.1.6(b) above, that these banks/dealers have the possibility to control the order
         flow and the liquidity thus acting as gatekeepers. Indeed, according to the Notifying
         Parties, their "main customers – the major global banks – exercise tremendous power
         over the exchanges"874.
   (1011) According to the Horizontal Merger Guidelines875: "countervailing buyer power in
         this context should be understood as the bargaining strength that the buyer has vis-à-
         vis the seller in commercial negotiations due to its size, its commercial significance to
         the seller and its ability to switch to alternative suppliers."
   (1012) As regards the Notifying Parties' claims: first, the cited ISDA report to which the
         Notifying Parties allude (see Recital (1009)), but which they do not name, is in fact
         entitled "Concentration of OTC Derivatives among Major Dealers" (Commission
         emphasis). The report therefore neither includes nor refers to ETDs. The Notifying
         Parties have not provided any supporting evidence for their claims as regards
         derivatives on exchange.
   (1013) Second, as outlined above in the Section on market definition (see Recitals (375) et
         seq.), there are significant limits to the manner in which broker-dealers may choose
         how to route orders from their customers, as even in those instances where alternative
         routes are possible (between OTC and on exchange), this option is rarely left by clients
         to brokers. As explained, once exchanges have succeeded in gaining liquidity, no dealer
         would consider it beneficial to move all of its business OTC, where no such benefits
         could accrue. Indeed, as stated by NYX at the Oral Hearing: "they go where the best
         liquidity is", which is in any event also normally required either under binding "best
         execution" obligations or bilateral agreements which customers may have with
         brokers.876
   (1014) Third, for European interest rate and equity derivatives, the Notifying Parties'
         customers are not simultaneously their competitors, nor the owners of their competitors,
         as the Notifying Parties claim. As explained in detail in the previous Recital and in
         Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.7 above, those market participants operate in a different space than
         regulated exchanges as they either generally focus on OTC trades that cannot be
         executed on exchanges' order books as they are either of large size or not standardised
         enough to be eligible for exchange trading or simply pass trades onto exchanges on
         customers' behalf. As regards the MTFs to which the Notifying Parties refer, these are
         in all instances active only in cash markets and have not penetrated the derivatives
         space in which the Notifying Parties are active to any significant or relevant extent -
         which is explained by the high barriers to entry and expansion amply demonstrated in
         Section 11.2.1.7 above.
   874
           See footnote 308 of this Decision.
   875
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 64.
   876
           […]*, See recording of Oral Hearing, 27 October 2011, afternoon session, at 03:02:20.
EN                                                     230                                           EN

   (1015) Fourth, the market investigation has not substantiated any of the Notifying Parties'
         claims relating to countervailing buyer power. Indeed, not buyer power but rather [...]*,
         who therefore made their observations known anonymously via AFME "out of concern
         to avoid damaging the commercial relationships of individual members which are
         dependent on the parties for their day to day business"877. This tends to indicate the
         opposite of customers who can dictate terms and conditions to the Notifying Parties.
   (1016) Fifth, the Notifying Parties do not seem to claim that individually a particular dealer
         could take its business elsewhere and thereby exercise countervailing power, but rather
         that this would be done collectively. Underlying this statement is that this would be the
         only way for the dealers to be able to continue to benefit from a substantial open
         interest and related cross-margining benefits. No attempt to substantiate this claim of
         collective action has however been made by the Notifying Parties during the procedure.
         Such collective action would have to involve a very substantial number of players as
         the top 20 represent less than […]*% of Liffe and Eurex volumes878. Such coordination
         to move open interest would entail a complex set of agreements which would be
         difficult to execute in practice, not least given the number of players involved (between
         the CCPs, between the members that hold open interest, requirements of best execution,
         difficulty of ensuring compliance with such an agreement, and potential antitrust
         considerations). The Notifying Parties have not offered any examples of prior occasions
         where such open interest has been shifted en masse by coordinated action.
   (1017) To the extent that customers might be able to coordinate in order to switch liquidity
         to a competing existing venue, which as outlined in Section 11.2.1.7.2 above appears
         difficult, the most likely and indeed only plausible alternative venue to trade the
         contracts in question, due to the size and composition of its margin pool, is the other
         Notifying Party, an option which would disappear as a result of the merger879.
   (1018) Further, no such entry has taken place or has been successful to date as outlined
         Section 11.2.1.7.2. The only notable example was the Project Rainbow attempt,
         explained in the Section 11.2.1.7.2.1. It did not succeed due to open interest and cross
         margining issues. Goldman Sachs explains the difficulties in this type of initiative:
         "these initiatives have so far failed to attract meaningful liquidity despite lower fees.
         This is because buyers want to be where sellers are and vice versa and market
         participants benefit from netting efficiencies if their contracts reside with a single
         counterparty"880.
   (1019) Indeed, the only examples of successful sponsored entry provided by the Notifying
         Parties are in markets outside those concerned by this Decision, namely markets in
         which the Notifying Parties do not meaningfully operate. These markets – such as US
         options – differ in terms of their economic structure from the markets concerned by this
   877
          AFME, observations at the Oral Hearing, 28 October 2011, paragraph 5 , [...]*.
   878
          Commission analysis based on data provided by the Notifying Parties, see Recital (1257) et seq.
   879
          According to the Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 31, customers are particularly vulnerable to
          price increases where there are reduced possibilities of switching, and in such cases, a merger may
          affect these customers' ability to protect themselves against increases in prices. The proposed
          transaction would significantly reduce customers' ability to switch to another supplier, since it would
          reduce the number of suppliers effectively to one.
   880
          Agreed minutes of a teleconference call with Goldman Sachs of 19 September 2011, [...]*.
EN                                                      231                                                       EN

         Decision. The other example offered relates to ICE and concerned CDS. As outlined in
         Sections 11.2.1.2.5 and 11.2.1.3.3 and Recital (938) above, this did not entail the
         shifting of any open interest as this was a completely new product in the ETD space.
   (1020) The argument made by the Notifying Parties according to which discounts to
         liquidity providers and market makers is also evidence of buyer power has not been
         substantiated. Price differentiation in favour of, for example, high frequency traders
         does not in itself demonstrate buyer power but can rather reflect economically rational
         pricing behaviour given the associated benefits that exchanges derive from the
         customers in question.
   (1021) It follows that the market power of the merged entity would not be constrained to any
         significant extent by buyer power on the part of its customers.
      11.2.1.9.CONCLUSIONS      ON COMPETITION BETWEEN THE NOTIFYING        PARTIES   IN TRADING
                AND CLEARING OF EXCHANGE TRADED DERIVATIVES
   (1022) Therefore, on the basis of the above analysis, and in view of the absence of
         countervailing factors, it is concluded for the purpose of this Decision that the notified
         transaction is likely to lead to a significant impediment to effective competition by
         eliminating the closest actual and potential competitor and creating a dominant or near
         monopoly position in the following markets, and this irrespective of the precise
         geographic market definition and for all categories of customers:
           a. The market for trading and clearing of existing and new European exchange-traded
               interest rate futures and options, and this independently of whether or not this
               market were to be divided between short and long term interest rate derivatives
               and/or on the basis of the currency of the underlying; and
           b. The market for trading and clearing of existing and new European exchange-traded
               single stock futures and options, and this independently of whether or not this
               market were to be defined at the basis of single underlyings, all underlyings of a
               given nationality, or all EEA underlyings.
   (1023) In addition, the notified transaction would lead to a significant impediment of
         effective competition in the area of new exchange-traded European equity index futures
         and options by eliminating the closest competitor.
   (1024) Given that it is unlikely that a timely entry would occur and sufficiently constrain the
         merged entity in its market behaviour, and in the absence of countervailing buyer
         power, the Notifying Parties' customers would likely face higher fees, less product
         innovation and would de facto have no choice of trading platform for these products.
EN                                                232                                               EN

       11.2.2. Off-order book services – registration, confirmation and CCP clearing of block
                 size ETD contracts
       11.2.2.1.INTRODUCTION
   (1025) As indicated in Section 11.1.2 on market definition above, the Notifying Parties both
          provide off-order book services for essentially the same set of instruments as they allow
          to be traded on the order book881. In addition, as mentioned and as further explained in
          Recitals (1045) et seq. below, it is possible to register and clear block size trades on
          Liffe in Eurex lookalike ETDs which are not offered on Liffe's order book.
   (1026) The off-order book service essentially comprises the same services as on-order book
          trading, less the trading layer, since trades entered into a block trade entry service are
          prearranged OTC. Nonetheless, once entered into the block service, these trades
          become fully fungible with their order book equivalent and may also be netted against
          trades on the order book. Such trades, even if they are agreed OTC, are usually referred
          to as trades "on exchange", by which it is meant that all parameters of the trade
          correspond to those of trades carried out on the order book of the exchange.
   (1027) The arguments presented in relation to on-order book trading in Section 11.2.1 above
          relating to both actual and potential competition therefore equally apply to off-order
          book services as well, since the contracts concerned are identical. Indeed, the Notifying
          Parties have not always been able to distinguish, even for their own activities, between
          volumes traded on- and off-order book882 and, for reasons of simplicity in the
           presentation, instances where competition occurs partly or wholly off order book have
           been included in Sections 11.2.1.4 and 11.2.1.5 above. […]*883. There are nonetheless
           certain specificities of off-order book services which need to be addressed in this
           Section.
       11.2.2.2.DEMAND FOR OFF-ORDER BOOK SERVICES
   (1028) As outlined in Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.3 above on market definition, the role of OTC as
           an alternative to the exchange (so-called "lookalikes") is very constrained – it is only an
           alternative for certain large players, for certain contracts, and for certain trading needs,
           which cumulatively are uncommon and usually in this case dictate the choice of OTC
           regardless of the exchange offering. Even where a trade in an exchange contract is
           agreed away from the exchange, the market investigation has shown that it is almost
           always brought into the exchange environment using the exchange's off-order book
           facility, at least if a liquid order book in the instrument exists. This is because doing so
           offers numerous advantages and very few disadvantages under the vast majority of
           circumstances.
   (1029)      The following quotes are typical in this regard:
   881
            Block size trading may, however, not be offered for certain instruments. This usually concerns only
            certain assets with very limited turnover on the order book, as for example certain commodity futures.
   882
            Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.289.
   883
            Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.289.
EN                                                         233                                                     EN

   (1030) Chi-X Europe states that: "Exchanges offer 'Wholesale Trading Facilities' to support
         the needs and preferences of their members to get their OTC trades executed under
         specific conditions e.g. in large size, in look-alike contracts, into clearing. As such it is
         rare for firms to trade OTC what they can trade on exchange when there is depth and
         tightness of price. Indeed, exchange members' customers have a clear preference for
         transacting on-exchange rather than OTC whether it be to e.g. meet fund related rules
         and regulations, secure central pricing, participate in a multi-lateral market or avoid
         duplication of positions"884.
   (1031) Nasdaq OMX states that: "Compared to OTC trading, off-order book trading reduces
         counterparty risk (because all contracts benefit from central counterparty clearing) and
         furthermore reduces operational risk inherent in back-office administration of OTC
         transactions, e.g. manual paper-based processes. Processing trades off-order book in
         an exchange environment also offers customers more flexibility than OTC trading. For
         example, customers are not bound to close out a position via the broker the customer
         opened it with. Furthermore customers like hedge funds can better meet the operational
         challenges of speedy reporting of net asset value to their investors if they trade off-
         order book instead OTC. Moreover customers can be sure that a trade off-order book
         will not fail, as may be the case in the OTC market where it is only possible to trade if
         another party is available that is willing to enter into a contract at the conditions
         envisaged. In sum, customers seeking the privacy and flexibility of the OTC market
         without the operational and counterparty risks associated with OTC trading will prefer
         off-order book trading to OTC trading, in particular if the price is competitive."885
   (1032) ICAP states that there is "little purpose in executing an OTC derivative unless a
         tailor-made solution is required"886.
   (1033) FOA notes that: "This kind of substitutability [between ETDs and OTC lookalikes] is
         not just economic but risk-dependent and the risk profile will vary significantly between
         exchange-traded and an OTC “lookalike” contract. In addition, exchanges have
         intellectual property in the contract design of their listed contract which means that
         “lookalike” OTC derivatives could be challenged. Risk management or trading needs
         of individual customers may mean that the only option is to use a “lookalike” OTC
         contract for a period of time … [after which] the customer will switch from the OTC
         exposure to the traded exposure. Another element may be that an OTC counterparty
         may accept collateral that may not otherwise be eligible for acceptability by CCP." 887
   (1034) [One large customer]* states that the circumstances under which it would trade an
         OTC lookalike are "limited – we would normally trade a contract of this type on
         exchange". "In Europe, lookalikes will exist, but they are not widely traded"888.
   (1035) [...]* 889
   884
           Chi-X Europe, response to question 8 of Q3 – Questionnaire to Competitors [...]*.
   885
           Reply to question 13 of Q10 – Questionnaire to competitors, Phase II [...]*.
   886
           ICAP, Observations on the SO submitted pursuant to article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation , 26
           October 2011, paragraph 6.7 [...]*.
   887
           Reply to question 17 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase II [...]*.
   888
           Reply to question 17 and 18 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase II [...]*.
   889
           Reply to question 18 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase II [...]*.
EN                                                     234                                                      EN

   (1036) DZ Bank states: "Hypothetically every ETD can have a look-alike OTC version. As
          successful ETD products have high liquidity, the probability that there is OTC trading
          in a look-alike OTC derivative is low." Société Générale also points out that "listed
          options all have, in theory, their look-alike OTC version, but this is not the case for
          futures." Unicredit Bank states: "Generally speaking this would make not much sense to
          create a look-alike OTC derivative, as in this case you can directly use ETDs." 890
   (1037) The importance of the service and of competition between the Notifying Parties has
          similarly been confirmed by the market investigation. For example, [one large
          customer]* states that: "as a best estimate, the bank executes approximately €5bn per
          year in listed single stock futures on either Eurex (via OTC block trade facility) or
          BClear".891
   (1038) The proportion of overall volumes resulting from trades negotiated away from the
          order book but subsequently brought into the exchange environment is illustrated in
          Table 13 below:
          Table 13 - Trades negotiated away from the order book and then brought into the
          exchange environment as a proportion of all trades on the platform in question
                                  NYX                           DB                               Combined
         […]*                     [0-5%]*                       [10-20%]*                        [10-20%]*
         […]*                     [10-20%]*                     [50-60%]*892                     [10-20%]*
         […]*                     [20-30%]*                     [40-50%]*                        [30-40%]*
         […]*                     [80-90%]*                     [60-70%]*                        [70-80%]*
         […]*                     [40-50%]*                     [40-50%]*                        [40-50%]*
           Source: Commission calculations based on Annex D.20 to the Form CO, Derivatives Section. The off-book figures
           include all OTC facilities such as BClear and OTC Flex and relate only to the Notifying Parties' European venues.
       11.2.2.3.COMPETITION BETWEEN THE NOTIFYING PARTIES
   11.2.2.3.1.       Introduction
   (1039) Block trades can be entered into Liffe environment through one of three systems –
          Bclear (discussed further in Section 11.2.3 below since it has a dual functionality, both
          off-order book and flex), as well as its Block Trading Facility (BTF) and the Prof
          Facility. The predominant route in the London market is Bclear for equity and index
          derivatives, although for historical reasons the BTF has been maintained in that market
          as an alternative route for index and single stock options, whilst it is the main route for
   890
           Replies to question 18 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase II [...]*.
   891
           Reply to question 22 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, phase II [...]*; see also minutes of call with
           UBS, 16 September 2011, point 4 [...]*.
   892
           On a low total of 0.7 million contracts.
EN                                                          235                                                              EN

         wholesale trade entry in fixed income products893. [In the Paris market, the BTF is the
         only wholesale route available, while in Amsterdam and Brussels only the Prof Facility
         is available, which offers less flexibility than BTF]*894.
   (1040) Block trades in Eurex listed ETDs can be entered into that environment using Eurex's
         Block Trade facility895.
   11.2.2.3.2.      Interest rate derivatives
   (1041) The Commission has obtained limited specific information allowing it to distinguish
         between on- and off-book trading as regards competition between the Notifying Parties
         in European interest rate products. Since, however, (i) Liffe's BTF does also apply for
         Euribor packs and bundles, and all of the Eurex money market products are also
         available through its BTF, (ii) as shown in Recital (485) above there is no reason to
         consider that there exists a significant constraint as a result of the option to keep
         positions fully in the OTC environment and (iii) in any case these two service offerings
         are intrinsically linked, the same arguments apply in relation to actual and potential
         competition for off-order book services as set out for on-order book services for interest
         rates (Sections 11.2.1.4.2 and 11.2.1.4.3). In particular, each of the Notifying Parties is
         the other's closest competitor in relation to off-book services for European interest rate
         derivatives. The Notifying Parties did not present any arguments or otherwise contest
         the Commission's preliminary conclusions in the SO in this regard.
   (1042) Indeed, the Commission further notes that none of the "competitors" cited by the
         Notifying Parties in their response to the SO, and indeed repeatedly throughout the
         procedure, offers off-book services in European interest rate futures and options. This is
         a logical consequence of the fact that in order to do so, by definition, also on-book
         services in these derivatives would need to be offered, and (with the recent and very
         limited exception of CME for Euribor), there are no other venues where these contracts
         can be traded on order book. The same arguments as set out in 11.2.1.7.1 relating to
         obstacles to entry and expansion apply.
   (1043) It is therefore concluded that the notified transaction will eliminate both actual and
         potential competition between the Notifying Parties in regard to off-book services for
         European interest rate derivatives. This is so irrespective of whether the market should
         be further subdivided between European short-term and long-term derivatives, and/or
         between products based on euro and sterling rates traded off-book but brought on
         exchange for registration. Indeed, the very significant competitive constraint that both
         Notifying Parties exert over each other under each of these alternative market
         definitions would in all cases be eliminated post-merger.
   11.2.2.3.3.      Single stock options and futures
   (1044) Off-order book trading is particularly important in single stock options and futures.
         Eurex volume trading data for February 2011 shows that approximately 99% of single-
   893
           On this aspect of the BTF, see http://www.euronext.com/editorial/wide/editorial-4243-EN.html, viewed
           on 28 September 2011.
   894
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.108.
   895
           Form CO, Derivatives, paragraph 6.109.
EN                                                     236                                                      EN

         equity futures and 53% of single-equity options were traded off-order-book before
         being brought onto the exchange896.
                            11.2.2.3.3.1.       Competition in products listed by both of the Notifying
                                 Parties
   (1045) Eurex's off-order BTF allows trade registration only in standard Eurex ETDs897 and
         the extent of overlaps between the Notifying Parties in such ETDs is therefore the same
         as in the case of on-order book trading. On Liffe's side, in addition to its BTF, Prof
         Facility and Bclear allowing trade entry of block trades in standard Liffe ETDs, it is
         also possible to use Bclear to enter trades in contracts not listed on the Liffe order book,
         including contracts offering a similar economic exposure to Eurex ETDs.
   (1046) NYX itself recognises internally the role played by Bclear in this space in the
         competition with Eurex as (referring to single equity options in three very liquid French
         blue-chips, […]*) "these 3 classes are among the most involved in Eurex threat and
         Bclear has proven to be efficient in repatriating part of the Eurex business on these
         names"898.
   (1047) Even though it has made requests to the Notifying Parties, the Commission has
         obtained only limited specific data distinguishing on- and off-book trading as regards
         competition between the Notifying Parties in respect of the set of equities where they
         also overlap on the order book. Since, however, as shown in Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.3
         above there is no reason to consider that there exists a significant constraint on off-
         order book services as a result of the option to keep positions fully in the OTC
         environment and in any case on- and off-order book service offerings are intrinsically
         linked, similar conclusions may be held to apply in the case of off-order book services
         to those already outlined above in respect of on-order book trading in the same ETDs in
         Section 11.2.1.5.
   (1048) The Notifying Parties have not provided any evidence to rebut the findings of the
         Commission that competition in respect of those contracts where the Notifying Parties
         overlap occurs at least to a similar degree off-order book. The Notifying Parties limit
         themselves to general criticisms that "no quantitative evidence of the degree of
         competition between the Parties in off-book trading" has been identified. The Notifying
         Parties also claim that "the SO makes no attempt to assess the large number of trade-
         matching services for cleared OTC derivatives, which provide the exact same service as
         the Parties' off-book trading facilities"899.
   (1049) Firstly, both the SO and this Decision clearly show the extent of the overlap between
         the Notifying Parties, identify those areas in which the merged entity would face no
         competition in off-book services at all post-merger (home markets for single equity
         futures and options, and all European interest rate futures and options), and identify
         those areas in which it would face a single competitor (all of those where they overlap
   896
           Form CO, Derivatives, footnote 44.
   897
           Notifying Parties' reply to question 1 of the Commission's RFI of 21 September 2011.
   898
           NYX internal document, Email from ,[…]*, 03.01.2008, Reference: ENX – 00174 – 0001.
   899
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 88.
EN                                                        237                                           EN

         outside home markets, for single equity derivatives only, and with the exception of
         Norway where there would be two remaining competitors, see Section 11.2.1.5.2.2
         above).
   (1050) As concluded when discussing actual and potential competition in on-order book
         trading of single equity futures and options in Section 11.2.1.5 above, such competition
         is real and significant. Indeed, given the significant volumes achieved on the order book
         in a number of instruments by the Party which does not list (though it may offer trading
         in) the underlying stock, competition in the off-order book space, where pricing
         competition is significant and incumbency advantages lower, may be more intensive
         still.
   (1051) Indeed, the Commission further notes that none of the "competitors" cited by the
         Notifying Parties in their response to the SO, and indeed repeatedly throughout the
         procedure, offers off-book services for single equity futures and options in competition
         with the Notifying Parties in their home markets. This is a logical consequence of the
         fact that in order to do so, by definition, also on-book services in these derivatives
         would need to be offered, and there are presently no other venues where these contracts
         can be traded on order book900. The same arguments as set out in 11.2.1.7.1 relating to
         obstacles to entry and expansion apply.
   (1052) In view of these structural features of the market and the fact that the combination
         leads, in most cases, to a monopoly, and moreover involves a non-insignificant
         increment to market share and the elimination of a significant competitive force in
         multiple markets or market segments, the Commission considers that the evidence
         presented, which includes significant quantitative elements (all of which, however,
         derive from the Notifying Parties which are the source of the data in question),
         demonstrates the competition that would be eliminated as a result of the merger.
                            11.2.2.3.3.2.      Universal stock futures
   (1053) A particular episode of competition focused on capturing wholesale trading involved
         Liffe’s Universal Stock Futures, which are global products with contracts available on
         an international list of stocks in seven major currencies: euro, Danish krone, Norwegian
         krone, pound sterling, Swedish krona, Swiss franc and US dollar901.
   (1054) Internal documents of NYX show clearly that it considered that Eurex was a
         significant threat when it announced its entry into this product area in 2005 and that
         Eurex "launched single stock futures on the same day as Bclear, 24 October '05,
         aggressively targeting our USFs franchise […]*."902
   (1055) This was perceived as a real threat to the Liffe franchise: "The Eurex threat to our
         USF market, conversations with users of the product and […]*… are calling for
   900
           With the very limited exception of TOM for Dutch equity derivatives, see section 11.2.1.5.3.
   901
           See Euronext website, available at http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/010/729/107293.pdf viewed on 20
           September 2011.
   902
           NYX internal document, Attachment to Email: Bclear Analysis, dated October 26, 2007, Reference
           ENX-00167-0001.
EN                                                     238                                                    EN

         immediate action…[…]*."903 On 1 March 2007, fees for all Universal Stock Futures
         registered via BClear (excluding those based on UK and US stocks) were reduced to
         Euro 0.20 per lot with a Euro 200 fee cap.904
   (1056) RBS states that "Universal stock options were launched on Liffe in 2004 and then
         Eurex followed with single stock futures in 2007. This competition between the two
         exchanges has provided dynamic service innovation and reduced trading costs".905
   (1057) NYX's analysis of the USF introduction is also clear as it considers that "the way to
         counteract the Eurex threat is to implement an aggressive […]* for USF in Bclear....
         The Eurex threat and USF being available on Bclear according to our current vision
         […]*, leads us to believe that we need to take action now in order to protect the
         franchise until end of Q1 06 and […]*".906
   (1058) In 2010, Liffe introduced very low fee caps for USF in Bclear, which may have been
         related to a perception of continuing threat from Eurex in this area.907
                           11.2.2.3.3.3.       Potential competition in off-book services for European
                                 single stock futures and options
   (1059) As well as actual competitors across a wide range of underlyings as described above,
         the Notifying Parties are each other's closest potential competitors in off-book services
         for European exchange-traded single stock futures and options (as shown in Section
         11.2.1.5.3 for on-order book trading), since there is no obstacle for one to introduce a
         contract presently listed by the other and to offer services related to it which benefit
         from all the advantages of access to the margin pool of the challenger as previously
         detailed in Section 11.2.1.7.1, an advantage not shared by any other player.
                           11.2.2.3.3.4.       Additional off-book constraint from Liffe with regard to
                                 contracts listed on Eurex only
   (1060) Furthermore, the possibility also exists of agreeing bilaterally a trade on an
         underlying traded on Eurex with exactly the same exercise terms as would apply if the
         trade were carried out on Eurex itself, but then clearing it instead through Bclear, a
         strategy which therefore might constitute an alternative in some cases to off-book
         trading of standard ETDs on Eurex. A certain amount of evidence points in the
         direction of this also constituting a relevant competitive constraint, although (as
         explained in the Section 11.2.3 on flexible contracts below) the Notifying Parties have
         not been able to distinguish volumes resulting from this possible use case from those in
   903
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Memo from ,[…]*,
           subject: USF fees structure for 2006, dated 17.10.2005, Reference ENX-00760 -00001.
   904
           See                   Euronext                   website,                  available             at
           http://www.euronext.com/trader/landing/landinguniversalstockfutures-2731-EN.html viewed on 20
           September 2011.
   905
           RBS, Reply to question 49 of Q8 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase II [...]*.
   906
           NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Memo from ,[…]*,
           subject: USF fees structure for 2006, dated 17.10.2005, Doc. Nr. ENX-00760 -00001.
   907
           London Notice No. 3329, http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/059/530/595306.pdf, viewed on 30
           September 2011.
EN                                                       239                                                   EN

         which the parameters are flexed. Use of Bclear in this way, while not achieving
         fungibility with the corresponding Eurex ETD, would still offer margin offsets and
         elimination of counterparty risk, and is therefore significantly different from trading a
         Eurex ETD lookalike OTC (therefore remaining outside of an exchange CCP).
   (1061) Through Bclear it is possible to bring a total of 2392 product codes corresponding to
         single stock options and 2287 corresponding to single stock futures into the exchange
         clearing environment. These represent futures on 1136 single equity underlyings and
         options on 583 single equity underlyings, including in both cases many traded
         principally on the order book of Eurex908. According to figures provided by the
         Notifying Parties, 131 German ISINs909 are available for trade confirmation and
         clearing with flexible parameters both on Bclear and on Eurex itself. The current Bclear
         contract list contains 134 German ISINs910.
   (1062) The relevance of this competitive constraint was alluded to in the market
         investigation. Thus UBS notes: "Liffe BClear competes with European incumbent
         derivative exchanges including Eurex."911
   (1063) In the Notifying Parties' view, the SO "explains that the “incremental” conclusion to
         be drawn in respect of off-book trading is that “even where trading in the same or
         lookalike ETD instruments may be carried out OTC, the Notifying Parties nonetheless
         capture most of the value chain and either compete with each other to do so". The
         Notifying Parties argue that "the SO provides no evidence of this”912.
   (1064) During the procedure, the Notifying Parties consistently argued that they face a
         constraint from OTC trading, but were not always clear on what exactly was meant by
         this. The Commission in the SO, intended to underline the fact that a trade may be
         agreed away from the exchange does not necessarily mean that the Notifying Parties
         face a constraint, or in any case not a very significant constraint, as regards trading on-
         order book. Indeed, the Notifying Parties anyway occupy either a monopoly or duopoly
         position downstream when the trade in question is reported to the exchange and enters
         into its clearing system and margin pool913.
   (1065) As argued above at Recitals (316) et seq., it is only a very small part of trades which
         is not only agreed bilaterally but remains in the OTC environment throughout their
         lifetime . As pointed out, this constraint, if any, is certainly very minor and is in any
         case a much less direct constraint on Eurex than the one formed by Bclear.
   908
           Notifying Parties' reply of 19 September 2011 to the Commission's RFI of 13 September 2011, annex 4.
   909
           International Securities Identification Number.
   910
           See                     NYX'                      website,                    available               at
           http://globalderivatives.nyx.com/sites/globalderivatives.nyx.com/files/bclear_contract_list_300811.xls,
           viewed on 23 September 2011.
   911
           UBS, Replies to questions 74 and 79 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase I [...]*.
   912
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 88, paragraph 89.
   913
           A similar point is made by ICAP at paragraph 6.14 of the Observations on the SO submitted pursuant to
           article 16(1) of the Implementing Regulation, 26 October 2011. Additionally, this could not be a
           constraint since the Notifying Parties impose minimum sizes on trades reported through their off order
           book facilities precisely in order to avoid draining liquidity from the order book.
EN                                                         240                                                      EN

   11.2.2.3.4.     Conclusion
   (1066) Given that the contracts traded off-book are exactly those (Bclear lookalikes aside)
         which are traded on order book, the discussion in Sections 11.2.1.3.4, 11.2.1.4.4,
         11.2.1.5.4 and 11.2.1.6 above in respect of product innovation applies equally to off-
         order book services..
   (1067) There is similarly no reason to distinguish between on and off order book services as
         regards any of the other dimensions of competition discussed in Section 11.2.1.3.5
         above including technology and market design, or to analyse entry barriers any
         differently in either case.
   (1068) Indeed, the most relevant competitive conclusion to be drawn which is incremental to
         those discussed in relation to on-order book trading relates to the fact that, even where
         trading in the same instruments may be carried out OTC, the Notifying Parties
         nonetheless capture through their off-book facilities most of the value chain in these
         contracts and compete with each other to do so. Where the Notifying Parties do not
         compete, they can already internalize through their unique position downstream,
         compared to the myriad ways in which it is possible to negotiate an OTC trade
         upstream, any rents available from the trading process.
   (1069) Furthermore, the arguments developed in Section 11.2.1.5.2.2 above in relation to the
         ability of the merged entity to leverage its position into futures and options on equities
         from outside their current "home" markets and eliminate remaining competition apply
         equally to off-order book services.
   (1070) Therefore, it is concluded that the notified transaction would result in a significant
         impediment of effective competition in relation to the market, or markets, for off-order
         book services, namely trade registration, confirmation and CCP clearing, of block size
         trades in European interest rate, equity and equity index futures and options. The notified
         transaction would eliminate the closest actual and potential competitor, and create a
         dominant or near-monopoly position as the merged entity would essentially be the only
         significant remaining player in these markets, which are characterised by high barriers
         to entry. As a result, customers would be exposed to higher fees, less innovation and
         less choice.
     11.2.3. Trade registration, confirmation and central counterparty clearing services for
               flexible versions of European equity futures and options traded OTC
      11.2.3.1.INTRODUCTION
   (1071) In addition to offering post-trade services for block size trading in their own ETDs,
         the Notifying Parties also offer the same services in relation to trades in flexible equity
         and equity index futures and options. As indicated in the market definition Section at
         Recital (477) above, flex contracts are single equity futures and options that could not be
         executed on exchange because certain of their economic parameters (such as strike date,
         strike price, settlement style and exercise style) deviate from those of the standard listed
         derivatives available on the order book of the exchange in question.
EN                                                 241                                                EN

   (1072) The ability to process flexible options was offered by Eurex since release 8.0 of its
         trading system in 2005914. Flexible futures were added in release 10.0 in November
         2007. Bclear was launched almost simultaneously, with Liffe Connect release 9.0 in
         October 2005, but offering both off-order book and flex functionality915.
   (1073) Both Bclear and OTC Flex offer identical services aimed at offering wholesale
         facilities for trade registration, confirmation and CCP clearing of flexible versions of
         exchange contracts. On OTC Flex, it is only possible to clear contracts on underlyings
         which are also listed on Eurex's standard order book, but this does include many
         contracts on which Liffe has the majority of the liquidity. On Bclear, there is a much
         wider range of products and it is also possible to clear contracts which are not tradable
         on the central order book of Liffe. In both cases, standard contract terms designed by
         the exchange apply to the contract. Bclear is, in addition, the primary route for
         customers to enter OTC trades in standard ETDs into the Liffe environment916.
   (1074) Both the Bclear and the OTC Flex products represent significant parts of the cleared
         volumes and open interest of both of the Notifying Parties in the equity and equity
         index options and futures space. For single stock futures, these products even represent,
         at least in the case of Liffe, the significant majority of volumes and open interest.
   (1075) Based on figures from the Euronext Factbook 2010917, Bclear represents the
         following fractions of volume, value and open interest in the respective asset classes for
         2010:
   914
           See             DB's            website,             available            at            http://deutsche-
           boerse.com/dbag/dispatch/de/binary/gdb_content_pool/imported_files/public_files/10_downloads/31_tr
           ading_member/10_Products_and_Functionalities/Flyer_Release_8.0_7.pdf, viewed on 23 September
           2011.
   915
           The off-order book functionality of BClear took over the functionality of an earlier block trade system
           used by Liffe in the UK.
   916
           Notifying Parties' reply of 16 September 2011 to the Commission's first RFI of 13 September 2011,
           page 4. In addition, in the Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 21 September 2011,
           question 3, they explain that "NYX has retained multiple routes to enter [block] trades for historical
           reasons".
   917
           www.euronext.com/fic/000/062/281/622812.xls, viewed on 23 September 2011.
EN                                                     242                                                          EN

         Table 14: Bclear percentage volume, value and open interest by asset class (2010)
                                                 by volume           by value         by open interest
          Single stock options                             16.2%              25.9%                    10.9%
          Single stock futures                             99.6%              99.6%                    47.3%
          Equity index options                             29.4%              39.8%                    38.3%
          Equity index futures918                            7.8%              8.6%                     4.0%
           Source: Based on figures from the Euronext Factbook 2010.
   (1076) Overall, for equity products, Bclear represents 55% by volume, 27% by value and
         18% by open interest.
   (1077) As indicated in the market definition Section of this Decision, these figures are likely
         to include a part, presumably limited, relating to Eurex "lookalikes", and a larger part
         related to off-order book business in Liffe ETDs. The Notifying Parties have claimed
         that they are unable to isolate this part, since [Liffe does not differentiate between
         standard and flexible parameters, and does not track trading volumes or other metric on
         the basis of trading terms]*919 This is not the case for Eurex, since the Flexible Options
         and Futures service only offers flexible terms for Eurex underlyings, whereas block
         trades are entered through a different facility, the Block Trade facility.
   (1078) The Bclear service itself is described by NYX as a "runaway success" which has
         "grown phenomenally with current year-on-year growth of 44%"920. The same source
         notes that, whilst "the volume on BClear is largely thanks to the hedge fund
         community… BClear has proven to be popular among all market participants from
         existing exchange members to traditional asset management firms". NYX concludes
         that further initiatives are in the pipeline as there is "a steady flow of customer requests
         for new products".
   (1079) In March 2011, Bclear registered its one billionth contract, and NYX declared that
         "today BClear is used by all the major banks and brokers in Europe"921.
   (1080) The Notifying Parties' internal documents also show not only the importance they
         attach to these trade registration, confirmation and central counterparty clearing
         services for flexible versions of European equity futures and options traded OTC , but
         also that the Notifying Parties are each other's closest competitor.
   918
           All trading on BClear in equity index futures is on standard economic terms, flexible parameters are not
           catered for (cf reply of Parties to RFI of 20 September 2011, Q.5).
   919
           Notifying Parties' reply to question 5 of the Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011.
   920
           See Euronext website, available at http://www.euronext.com/fic/000/051/986/519860.pdf, viewed on 23
           September 2011. The document is not dated but from around June 2010.
   921
           Euronext            press          release          of        9        March          2011,          see
           http://www.euronext.com/news/press_release/press_release-1731-EN.html?docid=970617 (viewed on
           26 January 2012).
EN                                                         243                                                      EN

   (1081) This is exemplified by the DB document: "Eurex - Growth Case - Existing OTC
          services", in which the opportunities in OTC clearing are analysed as well as a direct
          comparison of Eurex Flex/OTC with Bclear.922 In the document entitled "Major
          Strategic Projects 2010 - Meeting of the Group Executive Board", when analysing
          developments of 2009, it is specified that [Discussion on how to position a service
          offering in a successful manner]* 923
   (1082) Indeed, a few months after launching the service in 2006, NYX referred to Bclear as
          "the true competitor to Eurex's one stop shop platform, beating Eurex in simplicity,
          scope, efficiency, scalability".924
   (1083) An internal NYX email from 2010 reiterates the importance of Bclear […]*925.
       11.2.3.2.COMPETITION BETWEEN THE NOTIFYING PARTIES
   11.2.3.2.1.       Extent of competitive interaction
   (1084) The service offerings of the Notifying Parties overlap to a considerable extent. If
          single stock underlyings on which the Notifying Parties offer flexible contracts and
          which achieved positive 2010 volumes are examined, overlaps occur in 59 underlyings,
          corresponding to 53 options contracts and 19 futures contracts. In all of those cases,
          there was a competitive interaction between the Notifying Parties, which was frequently
          considerable. In Table 15, by way of illustration, all cases in which both of the
          Notifying Parties have at least 10% of the total combined volume on the Notifying
          Parties' platforms in 2010 are given. In all cases, the Notifying Parties are the only two
          competitors and therefore the combined market share sums to 100%.
          Table 15 – Market shares of the Notifying Parties in futures and options on
          selected individual stocks
   Name                  Country  Futures/Options Total volume    DB %               NYX %
   […]*                  […]*     […]*                       […]*      [10-20%]*              [80-90%]*
   […]*                  […]*     […]*                       […]*      [30-40%]*              [60-70%]*
   […]*                  […]*     […]*                       […]*      [20-30%]*              [70-80%]*
   […]*                  […]*     […]*                       […]*      [10-20%]*              [80-90%]*
   […]*                  […]*     […]*                       […]*      [20-30%]*              [70-80%]*
   […]*                  […]*     […]*                       […]*      [50-60%]*              [40-50%]*
   […]*                  […]*     […]*                       […]*      [10-20%]*              [80-90%]*
   922
           See DB internal document .[…]*.
   923
           DB internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July dated .[…]*.
   924
           NYX internal document "Eurex - The World's Leading Derivatives Exchange - A viewpoint from the
           inside", 14/12/2006, Reference ENX-00789 -00011/13.
   925
           NYX internal document, email from […]* to […]* ([…]* of NYX) and others, on 4.06.2010 at 10:04,
           Reference ENX-00855 -00001.
EN                                                      244                                                EN

   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [20-30%]*  [70-80%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [20-30%]*  [70-80%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [40-50%]*  [50-60%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [40-50%]*  [50-60%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [60-70%]*  [30-40%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [20-30%]*  [70-80%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [60-70%]*  [30-40%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [10-20%]*  [80-90%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [50-60%]*  [40-50%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [10-20%]*  [80-90%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [50-60%]*  [40-50%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [10-20%]*  [80-90%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [60-70%]*  [30-40%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [80-90%]*  [10-20%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [50-60%]*  [40-50%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [70-80%]*  [20-30%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [70-80%]*  [20-30%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [30-40%]*  [60-70%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [10-20%]* [90-100%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [10-20%]*  [80-90%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [10-20%]*  [80-90%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [10-20%]*  [80-90%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [30-40%]*  [60-70%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [30-40%]*  [60-70%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [30-40%]*  [60-70%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [10-20%]*  [80-90%]*
   […]*              […]*       […]*                        […]*    [10-20%]* [90-100%]*
        Source: Notifying Parties' submission of 16 September 2011.
EN                                                      245                              EN

   (1085) From Table 15, it can be seen that Bclear has been successful in making inroads into
         the OTC clearing of flexible versions of contracts where most of the liquidity in the
         standard ETD is on Eurex – in many cases to the point where the significant majority of
         trades, on an appreciable volume of trading, was put through Bclear and not OTC
         Flex926. The underlyings concerned by competition between Bclear and OTC Flex are
         frequently the largest European blue chip stocks (components of the Eurostoxx 50 are
         indicated with an asterisk in Table 15 above).
   (1086) Conversely, DB has achieved volumes through OTC Flex also in contracts where the
         standard ETD has most of the liquidity on Liffe, in two cases over 10%927. According
         to the Notifying Parties, about 14% by volume of trading which is put through Bclear
         concerns underlyings which are available on the Eurex order book, but not on Liffe
         itself928.
   (1087) Indeed, this success has characterised Bclear for a number of years. As Hugh
         Freedberg, then CEO and now Chairman of Liffe, stated in November 2006, "more than
         30% of volume transacted through our post trade and clearing service for OTC equity
         derivatives trading is in options on stocks listed on Eurex, which now seeks to compete
         in this area"929.
   (1088) In addition to this, potential competition between the Notifying Parties concerns a
         very broad range of contracts. Many contracts, indeed, are already available for clearing
         on both platforms even if one of them does not currently have any volume,
         demonstrating the ease with which a contract can be offered for clearing in competition
         with the other Notifying Party if there is customer demand to do so: contracts already
         available for clearing through both services concern 272 futures and 715 options on a
         given underlying, a total of 987 overlaps. These concern, for example, 145 UK
         instruments (counting futures and options separately), 134 French instruments and 131
         German instruments.
   (1089) […]*930 [An internal NYX email acknowledged the similarities between NYX’s and
         Eurex’s single stock futures]*931.
   926
           Based on the information which the Notifying Parties have provided, it is not possible to ascertain how
           much of the BClear volume in these underlyings may, however, be due to contracts with identical
           economic terms to the standard Eurex ETD and therefore rather compete with off-order book trading on
           Eurex than with OTC Flex, since all volumes in underlyings not traded on Liffe's central order book are
           recognised as "flexible" volumes in the statistics provided by the Notifying Parties.
   927
           The Commission takes it that liquidity in Generali options is mostly on IDEM. The BClear volume
           against which this is compared may, however, include volumes on standard order book terms since, as
           the Notifying Parties clarify in their reply to Q.5 of the Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011, "the
           standard terms are merely a subset of the available flexible terms".
   928
           Notifying Parties' reply of 16 September 2011 to the Commission's first RFI of 13 September 2011,
           page 14.
   929
           Open letter to the Financial Times, available at:
           http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/59bd1750-6f99-11db-ab7b-0000779e2340.html#axzz1TJtvdq00
           (viewed on 26 January 2012)
   930
           Parties' figures in reply of 16 September 2011 to the Commission's first RFI of 13 September 2011.
   931
           NYX internal document, Email from "OTC Services" to a variety of recipients, 5 January 2010, ENX-
           00468-00001.
EN                                                         246                                                     EN

   (1090) The Notifying Parties provided limited information on these overlaps in their initial
         notification of the transaction and, in their submission of 16 September 2011, did not
         provide any estimates of overall market share in flexible contracts on any underlying.
         However, the Commission is nonetheless able to conclude that as regards underlyings
         where the principal liquidity is on one or other of the Notifying Parties' exchanges, they
         are each other's closest and frequently perhaps only real competitor for CCP clearing of
         flexible versions of the contract, as detailed in the remainder of this Section. This
         conclusion is consistent with the statement of the Notifying Parties themselves that
         "there are other exchanges that offer off-book trading services for European equity
         derivatives. However, to the Parties' best knowledge, none of these offer flexible options
         or futures which gained significant volume"932.
   (1091) It should be further noted that the possibility of trading a contract on a "Eurex"
         underlying OTC and then clearing it through Bclear includes the possibility of trading it
         with exactly the same exercise terms as on Eurex itself, and therefore constitutes an
         alternative to off-book trading of standard ETDs on Eurex which, although it does not
         achieve fungibility with the corresponding Eurex ETD, still offers margin offset and
         elimination of counterparty risk. Thus UBS notes that: "Liffe BClear competes with
         European incumbent derivative exchanges including Eurex."933 This is also confirmed
         by AFME: " This type of trading came into being… also for the Parties to compete with
         each other in certain single stock derivatives which (at least in the case of BClear) are
         not always available on the order book itself."934
   11.2.3.2.2.        Competitive parameters
   (1092) The Notifying Parties compete with each other for flow based on price, service
         offering and available collateral benefits.
   (1093) The ability of the Notifying Parties to compete with each other in this area is broader
         still in scope than for standard ETDs. This is due to the fact that, for flex contracts935,
         fungibility is not a consideration and therefore not a barrier to entry – even if all the
         other barriers referred to in Section 11.2.1.7 are applicable, including the possibility of
         cross margining. This means that the barriers to entry remain high for third parties, but
         are lower as between the Notifying Parties themselves due to the similar size and
         composition of their equity margin pools.
   (1094) Competition is mainly on fees as well as scope of product offering (leading to margin
         benefits) and service level. One market participant described this competition as
         follows: "Launching of BClear in Liffe was followed by the launching of Flex contracts
         in Eurex, and the competition was focused mainly in prices (leading to a capped fee
         structure extremely cheap for users) and number of underlyings."936 Another market
         participant stated that: "Liffe (Bclear) followed Eurex into the block equity single stock
   932
           Notifying Parties' reply of 16 September 2011 to the Commission's first RFI of 13 September 2011,
           page 13.
   933
           UBS, reply to question 74 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers, Phase I [...]*.
   934
           AFME, agreed minutes of a meeting of 24 August 2011 [...]*.
   935
           Except where the flexibility merely consists in longer maturities of otherwise standard ETDs.
   936
           [...]*, reply to question 96 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
EN                                                         247                                               EN

         space and have probably achieved greater market share across most European markets
         due to the increased flexibility offered by the Bclear product."937
   (1095) A NYX internal document also demonstrates that […]*.938
   (1096) A 2009 DB document also specifies that […]*.939
   (1097) In the same vein, a marketing presentation by Eurex from April 2010 lists new fees
         for its wholesale trading services, which include OTC Flex, several categories of which
         have been significantly reduced to align with those of Bclear. Those fees which were
         already lower are left unchanged. Eurex explicitly compared its fees to Bclear's (and not
         to any other company)940.
   (1098) ICAP notes that "BClear single stock futures (flex and standard) have been more
         successful than Eurex's offering due to increased functionality and responsiveness to
         market demands in terms of breadth of underlying listings. Eurex is slightly more
         expensive, but the market has primarily been attracted to the Liffe offering … due to
         functionality rather than fees"941.
   (1099) An internal NYX email from January 2010 compares the two markets in respect of
         single stock futures (where it should be recalled that [90-100%]* of volume goes
         through Bclear on the Liffe side and the overlap in offerings is considerable). This
         source emphasizes the rivalry, noting that […]*942.
   (1100) The same source underlines the head-to-head competition by noting that […]*.
   (1101) This competition would be eliminated by the merger. In this regard, one respondent
         stated that: "The amalgamation of the two largest listed futures and option Exchanges
         in Europe could, given little viable competition, result in a hefty increase in exchange
         clearing fees, exercise/assignment, cash settlement and delivery fees across all products
         and instruments. This is of particular concern in Equity Options where there is
         currently active competition between Eurex and BClear/NYSE on European single
         stocks and as a result the prices are kept relatively low"943.
   11.2.3.2.3.    Competitors
   (1102) The Notifying Parties face limited competition for these services. Those similar
         services which do exist are narrower in scope and cannot compete with the Notifying
         Parties even at present, except possibly in niche domestic markets.
   937
          ICAP, response to question 96 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
   938
          See NYX internal document provided in response to the Commission's RFI of 1 July 2011, Email from
          ,[…]*, August 7, 2007, p. 1.
   939
          DB internal document, .[…]*.
   940
          Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's RFI of 20 September 2011, Annex 7, page 91.
   941
          ICAP Securities Ltd, reply to question 50 of Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II [...]*.
   942
          NYX internal document, Email from "OTC Services" to a variety of recipients, 5 January 2010,
          Reference ENX-00468-00001.
   943
          BGC, Response to question 109 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
EN                                                     248                                                  EN

   (1103) A significant majority of customers questioned was unable to identify any competitor
         to the Notifying Parties at all in this area. One of the few customers who did specified
         that: "MEFF, IDEM and EDX offer local product coverage, however they do not offer
         cross-collateralisation with existing margin pools, which makes costs prohibitive. No
         other platforms offer pan-European coverage, attempting to enter that market without
         access to existing margin pools would be unlikely to succeed as a new pool would be
         uneconomic."944
   11.2.3.2.4.      Impact of anticipated regulatory developments
   (1104) Demand for the competing services offered by the Notifying Parties will only
         become stronger as a result of envisaged regulatory reforms described in Recital
         (1106)et seq..
   (1105) The evolving regulatory environment is an important backdrop to the parameters of
         competition in derivatives markets, and in particular as regards the current and potential
         near-term future offerings of the Notifying Parties through their Bclear and OTC
         Wholesale/Flex systems.
   (1106) As an immediate reaction to the recent financial crisis, regulatory initiatives were
         designed both in the Union945 and globally946 to increase transparency in financial
         markets and decrease systemic risk.
   (1107) Two main regulatory developments are therefore expected947:
          - mandatory trading on organised trading venues of all eligible standardised
                derivatives contracts, and
          - a move towards mandatory CCP clearing of eligible OTC derivatives contracts
                intended to mitigate operational and credit risk associated with OTC derivatives
                trading.
   944
          [...]*, reply to question 28 of Q8 – Questionnaire to Customers, Phase II [...]*. In its reply to Q10,
          Nasdaq OMX also refers to its TMC ("Tailor Made Clearing") facility, which offers a similar type of
          service but is not mentioned by customers as a competitor [...]*.     See
          http://nordic.nasdaqomxtrader.com/Clearing/optionsfuturesclearing/Tailor_Made_Clearing/ (viewed on
          16 September 2011).
   945
          Commission Communication of 4 March 2009 "Driving European Recovery" which emphasised the
          need to strengthen the Union's regulatory framework for financial services (COM(2009) 114).
          Commission Communication of 3 July 2009 which assessed the role of derivatives in the financial crisis
          (Commission Communication "Ensuring efficient, safe and sound derivatives markets" - COM(2009)
          332, Staff Working Paper SEC(2009) 905, and Consultation document SEC(2009) 914.).
   946
          Following the summit in Pittsburgh on 26 September 2009, the G20 Leaders' Statement concluded that:
          "All standardized OTC derivative contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic trading
          platforms, where appropriate, and cleared through central counterparties by end-2012 at the latest.
          OTC derivative contracts should be reported to trade repositories. Non-centrally cleared contracts
          should be subject to higher capital requirements." The USA has implemented the Pittsburgh
          commitments through the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
          Act in July 2011.
   947
          See Communication of 20 October 2009 of the European Commission COM(2002) 563.
EN                                                     249                                                       EN

   (1108) At the European level, the Commission is currently working on two legislative
          projects addressing these issues: the review of the Markets in Financial Instruments
          Directive ("MiFID II") which will seek inter alia to move standardised OTC contracts
          to exchanges or electronic trading platforms; and the draft Regulation on OTC
          Derivatives, Central Counterparties and Trade Repositories948 ("EMIR") which,
          following on from international commitments in the wake of the financial crisis, aims at
          mandating clearing for eligible OTC derivatives contracts949.
   (1109) The combined impact of these legislative projects will likely derive from the
          expected shift of derivatives trading business from the OTC environment to trading
          venues and from bilateral to CCP clearing. As a result, these regulatory developments
          will provide incumbent exchanges, such as the Notifying Parties, with additional
          opportunities to compete in capturing derivatives volumes which would absent the
          regulatory changes stay in the OTC world. This, absent the merger, would be likely to
          translate into even greater head-to-head competition between Eurex and Liffe,
          especially as regards flexible equity futures and options, due to the advantages deriving
          from the size and scope of their respective margin pools. This may quite possibly also
          apply in respect of European interest rate products.
   (1110) Whatever the precise final scope of the legislation in question, the Notifying Parties
          will be very well placed to compete with each other and capture a certain part, if not the
          lion's share, of this business. In this regard, Chi-X Europe emphasises the Notifying
          Parties' advantage stemming from their existing margin pools: "those exchanges that
          have deep franchises in certain asset classes will be much better place[d] to capture
          correlated OTC business as they, through their CCPs, can offer risk and margin related
          efficiencies. "950 Following the merger, such competition between the Notifying Parties
          would no longer exist.
       11.2.3.3.MEANINGFUL ENTRY IS UNLIKELY
   (1111) Amongst possible entrants in this area, the most frequently, though still rarely, cited
          by respondents to the market investigation are CME and ICE, through their respective
          European clearing divisions. However, ample evidence suggests that any competitive
          constraint that these may form either now or in the future is at best limited or uncertain
          as regards the core asset classes offered by the Notifying Parties.
   948
            COM(2010) 484.
   949
            In order to strengthen this move, higher capital requirements are planned to be imposed on non-
            centrally cleared derivatives contracts in the context of the implementation of the Basel III rules. The
            Commission issued a public consultation of 2 February 2011 on amendments to the Capital
            Requirements Directive ("CRD") on regulatory capital of financial institutions in respect of their
            centrally                        cleared                        derivatives                       trades
            (http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/docs/2011/credit_risk/consultation_paper_en.pdf).
            The CRD would aim to propose that exposures to a CCP would be subject to a zero own funds
            requirement as long as the CCP meets certain requirements (to be set out in EMIR and based on CPSS-
            IOSCO recommendations). Such favourable treatment would not apply to fully bilateral non-cleared
            OTC derivatives. If the expected CRD legislation materializes, it would constitute an additional strong
            incentive on financial institutions to put, where possible, their OTC trading volumes through CCP
            clearing. As a result, it may be expected that the CCP clearing service will grow significantly in
            importance in the future.
   950
            Chi-X Europe, reply to question 57 of Q3 – Questionnaire to Competitors [...]*.
EN                                                        250                                                        EN

   (1112) For example, Chi-X Europe notes that "CME Europe and ICE Clear Europe would
          need to offer margin synergies with the open interest they manage in the US… such
          cross-jurisdictional benefits are very hard to realize because of the different underlying
          regulatory and legal environments and bankruptcy laws."951 [...]*.952 Indeed, neither
          CME nor ICE presently offers either trading or clearing in single equity futures at all,
          even on US underlyings.
   (1113) It is particularly significant to note that Turquoise derivatives (formerly EDX) has
          had a flexible contracts service on Russian underlyings for some time, but has not been
          able to break into the market for flexible contracts on UK underlyings despite the
          franchise of its parent, LSE, in the trading of the underlying cash securities, and despite
          the margin pool available at LCH.
   (1114) Similarly, post-trading services for flexible contracts offered by MEFF and Nasdaq
          OMX are limited in their scope essentially to Spanish and Nordic underlyings
          respectively953. Neither entity appears to have tried or ever considered the scope to
          enter the market for trading flexible options and futures on underlyings within the scope
          of Eurex and Liffe's "home" markets.
   (1115) In addition, the arguments outlined in the Section above concerning difficulty of
          entry (Section 11.2.1.7.1.2) as a result of lack of access to margin pool also apply in
          this context given the link between the trades brought onto the Notifying Parties'
          clearing facilities and their existing margin pools in these facilities.
       11.2.3.4.POINTS MADE BY THE NOTIFYING PARTIES IN THEIR RESPONSE TO THE SO
   (1116) The Notifying Parties, in their response to the SO, make several of the same points in
          regard to flexible options and futures as in regard to off-order book trading. These do
          not need to be repeated here since the Commission's analysis of these points and its
          conclusion in relation to them is identical to that presented in the Section on off-order
          book trading above.
   (1117) The Notifying Parties claim that the SO "completely ignores a number of other
          providers of similar services in the marketplace; these include MEFF, IDEM,
          Turquoise Derivatives, and NASDAQ OMX."954 This claim is, however, incorrect since
          the SO clearly stated that none of these third parties had any product offering in
          competition with the Notifying Parties, notwithstanding possessing (with the exception
          of IDEM) comparable technology and a comparable service offering in respect of a
          different set of underlyings. This strongly suggests that there is no demand for
          expansion of the service offerings of any of these alternative providers, a fact which is
          fully consistent with the conclusion that the existing margin pool of the Notifying
          Parties is a strong barrier to entry in this market.
   951
            Chi-X Europe, reply to question 69 of Q3 – Questionnaire to Competitors [...]*.
   952
            [...]*.
   953
            According to the Nasdaq OMX website, "TMC is offered on derivatives on Danish, Finnish, Icelandic,
            Norwegian, Russian, Kazakhstanian [sic] and Swedish shares and indices", which would imply it has
            negligible        overlap        with       the       Notifying        Parties' offerings.     See
            http://nordic.nasdaqomxtrader.com/Clearing/optionsfuturesclearing/Tailor_Made_Clearing/ (viewed on
            16 September 2011).
   954
            Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 89.
EN                                                        251                                                  EN

   (1118) The Notifying Parties go on to claim that the analysis in the SO was "exclusively
          related to the current offerings by these competitors and [did not] attempt to assess
          whether these competitors would pose a viable alternative in response to any attempt to
          exercise market power by the merged NYX/DB", further claiming that "because, as the
          SO recognizes, competition in this area does not depend on a liquid order book,
          competitors can quickly and easily expand their offerings in competition with NYX's
          and DB's offering."955
   (1119) In order for the threat of entry to constrain the merged entity it would need to be
          "likely, timely and sufficient to deter or defeat any potential anti-competitive effects of
          the merger"956. The Commission notes that the Notifying Parties have presented no
          evidence in support of their claim that "competitors can quickly and easily expand their
          offerings" and furthermore that there is no evidence on the file in support of such a
          claim. […]*
   (1120) For the same reasons as apply in respect of the margin pool deriving from on- and
          off-book trading of equity and equity index futures and options, entry would be unlikely
          to succeed due to inability to offer margin benefits on a similar scale. Indeed, the
          barriers to entry reinforce each other, as it is only the size and composition of the
          margin pool that is relevant, and not the origin of it, whether it be through on- or off-
          book trading of standard ETDs or through trading of flexible equity and equity index
          futures and options or equity and equity index futures and options unavailable on the
          respective order book.
   (1121) In relation to the distinct point made by the Notifying Parties in their response to the
          SO on the consequences of regulatory reform957, it is concluded that, as set out
          throughout this Decision, the margin pool of the merged entity specifically in European
          equity futures and options would confer upon it a unique advantage and ensure that this
          class of business, to the extent it was required to be brought onto exchange, would
          predominantly be brought to the platform of the merged entity, which would therefore
          be in a position to exercise market power in this regard. For the reasons set out in
          Section 11.2.1.8 on buyer power above, it is concluded that customers would be unable,
          even if they had an incentive, to direct this class of business to an alternative platform
          which was not in a position to offer comparable collateral benefits to those which could
          be offered by the merged entity.
       11.2.3.5.CONCLUSION
   (1122) Eurex and Liffe are each other's closest actual and potential competitors in the
          market for trade registration, confirmation and central counterparty clearing services for
          flexible versions of European equity futures and options traded OTC. The notified
          transaction would therefore eliminate this unique competitive constraint that Eurex and
          Liffe exert on each other in this area.
   (1123) The notified transaction eliminates the important competitive relationship between
          the Notifying Parties, and with high barriers to entry limits the possibilities for
   955
            Notifying Parties response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 90.
   956
            Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 68.
   957
            Notifying Parties' response to the SO, single equity derivatives, paragraph 90.
EN                                                        252                                         EN

          customers to switch to other products or suppliers or to pursue at similar cost other
          trading strategies such as those available OTC. Moreover, the market investigation has
          provided no evidence of significant countervailing buyer power. The loss of the
          existing pricing constraint which has been evident in this area, as well as of the stimulus
          to innovation, will provide the merged entity with the ability and incentives to increase
          overall prices and offer less customer choice.
   (1124) This market, and competition in it, is closely related to the Notifying Parties' core
          equity derivative franchises, which have allowed them to develop these additional
          service offerings, capturing further trade flows from the OTC environment and further
          reinforcing their core ETD franchises by reducing further the attractiveness of staying
          in the OTC environment even when a certain degree of flexibility is sought in the
          contract specifications. Once again, the key element is the scale and scope of the
          Notifying Parties' respective margin pools, which would be further, and substantially,
          enlarged as a result of the notified transaction.
   (1125) Therefore, it is concluded that the notified transaction would result in a significant
          impediment of effective competition in relation to the market for trade registration,
          confirmation and clearing services for flexible European equity and equity index futures
          and options traded OTC by eliminating the closest actual and potential competitor, and
          by creating a dominant or near-monopoly position as the merged entity would
          essentially be the only significant remaining player in these markets, which are
          characterised by high barriers to entry.
       11.2.4. Conclusion on derivatives
   (1126) The notified transaction would combine the two leading European derivatives
          exchanges which are de facto the only relevant players in the markets for European
          financial derivatives. In this context, the notified transaction, if implemented, would
          eliminate actual and potential competition in a number of derivatives products areas,
          namely existing and new European interest rate and single stock equity derivatives, and
          this irrespective of the precise product and geographic market definitions. Similarly,
          competition in the area of new European equity index derivatives would be eliminated
          as a result of the notified transaction. In addition, competition between the Notifying
          Parties in technology, processes, service and market design would also be eliminated.
   (1127) As explained in Section 11.2.1.7 and Section 11.2.1.8, barriers to entry into these
          markets are high and countervailing buyer power weak.
   (1128) Given the elimination of the only credible constraint that currently exists in these
          markets, the merged entity would most likely be able to impose higher trading and
          clearing fees to customers in the EEA958 and engage in less product and technology
          innovation. The de facto choice of derivatives trading platforms in the relevant product
   958
            Indeed, a number of market participants have expressed concerns about price increases as a result of the
            merger. By way of example, BGC stated that "The amalgamation of the two largest listed futures and
            option Exchanges in Europe could, given little viable competition, result in a hefty increase in exchange
            clearing fees, exercise/assignment, cash settlement and delivery fees across all products and
            instruments": BGC, Response to question 109 of Q1 – Questionnaire to customers [...]*.
EN                                                       253                                                          EN

         areas would go from two to one as a result of which customers would see a reduction in
         the quality of service.
   (1129) Furthermore, the notified transaction, if implemented, is likely to damage
         competition and innovation in European interest rate and single stock equity derivatives
         markets at a moment when regulatory initiatives are expected to lead to significantly
         greater volumes of derivatives being traded and/or cleared on exchange.
   (1130) The negative impact of the notified transaction is likely to be significant. Exchange-
         traded derivatives are of critical importance for the economy. They serve as insurance
         against price movements and reduce the volatility of companies' cash flows, which in
         turn results in more reliable forecasting, lower capital requirements, and higher capital
         productivity. Exchange-traded derivatives also help to create a more liquid financial
         market for raising capital - this benefits both SMEs and larger firms. With no
         disciplining force left in the market, the merger is most likely to take away the benefits
         of price competition from retail and institutional investors and lead to less innovation in
         these markets where companies and financial institutions constantly look for new
         alternatives for their risk transfer solutions.
   (1131) It follows that the notified transaction is likely to lead to a significant impediment of
         effective competition by creating a dominant or near-monopoly position and
         eliminating the closest actual and potential competitor in the markets for:
                  a. existing and new European exchange-traded interest rate futures and
                      options, and this independently of whether or not this market were to be
                      divided between short and long term interest rate derivatives and/or on the
                      basis of the currency of the underlying.
                  b. existing and new European exchange-traded single stock futures and
                      options, and this independently of whether or not this market were to be
                      defined at the basis of single underlyings, all underlyings of a given
                      nationality, or all EEA underlyings.
                  c. Off-order book services for block size European ETD contracts
                      (irrespective of whether this market is further divided on any of the lines
                      considered for on-book trading), and
                  d. Trade registration, confirmation and CCP clearing services for flexible
                      versions of European equity futures and options traded OTC.
   (1132) In addition, the notified transaction is likely to lead to a significant impediment of
         effective competition in the area of new exchange-traded European equity index futures
         and options by eliminating the closest competitor.
   12.     EFFICIENCIES
    12.1. INTRODUCTION
   (1133) The Notifying Parties submit that the notified transaction will lead to a number of
         efficiencies. While the Form CO included a section on purported efficiencies deriving
EN                                                  254                                              EN

         from the notified transaction, providing some high-level estimates of those
         efficiencies,959the Notifying Parties complemented this initial submission only on 5
         September 2011960. That submission provided some further underlying economic
         reasoning and data and elaborated on the claimed efficiencies961. The Notifying Parties
         have since further supplemented their efficiencies claims in order to address the
         Commission's concerns raised in the SO and during the Oral Hearing, and to respond to
         various requests for information962. Those submissions were made on 24 October 2011,
         7, 16, 18 and 21 November 2011 and then finally on 5 and 13 December 2011. All
         those submissions and claims are analysed in detail in the sub-sections dealing with
         each type of efficiencies claimed by the Notifying Parties.
   (1134) According to Article 2(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation, the Commission shall
         "consider the development of technical and economic progress provided that it is to the
         consumer's advantage and does not form an obstacle to competition". Recital 29 of the
         Merger Regulation provides that "in order to determine the impact of a concentration
         on competition in the common market, it is appropriate to take account of any
         substantiated and likely efficiencies put forward by the undertaking concerned" and that
         it is "possible that the efficiencies brought about by the concentration counteract the
         effects on competition, and in particular the potential harm to consumers, that it might
         otherwise have and that, as a consequence, the concentration would not significantly
         impede effective competition".
   (1135) Therefore, the Commission takes into account, in its analysis, substantiated
         efficiencies brought forward by the Notifying Parties and may, in accordance with the
         Horizontal Merger Guidelines, decide on this basis "that there are no grounds for
         declaring the merger incompatible with the common market pursuant to Article 2(3) of
         the Merger Regulation. This will be the case when the Commission is in a position to
         conclude on the basis of sufficient evidence that the efficiencies generated by the
         merger are likely to enhance the ability and incentive of the merged entity to act pro-
   959
           Form CO, section 9.
   960
           Day 21 after the initiation of proceedings together with their response to the decision opening the
           proceedings.
   961
           This submission included the following documents: Padilla, J. and Coppi, L. "Compass Lexecon’s
           efficiency analyses: an overview" of 5 September 2011; Padilla, J. and Coppi, L "Revisiting the
           liquidity effects of the creation of Euronext’s integrated cash market" of 5 September 2011; Padilla, J.
           and Coppi, L "Revisiting the liquidity effects of the creation of Euronext’s integrated cash market" of 5
           September 2011; Padilla, J. and Coppi, L. "Assessing the liquidity effects of the creation of Euronext's
           integrated derivatives platform" of 5 September 2011; Padilla, J. and Coppi, L. "Economy-wide
           implications of the Transaction" of 5 September 2011; and Padilla, J. and Coppi, L. " User benefits in
           the areas of IT and user access" of 5 September 2011.
   962
           The Notifying Parties submitted two papers dealing with efficiencies in their response to the SO
           "Response to Statement of Objections-Transaction related Efficiencies" of 24 October 2011 and
           Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the proposed transaction" of 24 October 2011. Furthermore, the
           Notifying Parties submitted a memorandum Compass Lexecon "Response to comments at oral hearing"
           of 16 November 2011. In response to request for information of 3 November 2011 and 17 of November
           2011 dealing with IT, collateral and liquidity claimed efficiencies the Notifying Parties submitted
           additional evidence on 7, 18 and 21 November 2011. On 5 and 13 December 2011 the Notifying Parties
           submitted additional reports by Compass Lexecon "The relevance of Euronext integration to the
           Transaction" and "Response to Commission services economic experts' econometric analysis" 13
           December 2011".
EN                                                       255                                                         EN

         competitively for the benefit of consumers, thereby counteracting the adverse effects on
         competition which the merger might otherwise have."963
   (1136) The Horizontal Merger Guidelines establish a cumulative set of requirements to take
         efficiencies into consideration. Efficiencies have to benefit consumers, be merger-
         specific and be verifiable964.
   (1137) First, the "relevant benchmark" in the assessment of efficiency claims is that
         consumers should be no worse off as a result of the merger. For that purpose,
         efficiencies have to be substantial and timely, and should, in principle, benefit
         consumers in those relevant markets where it is otherwise likely that competition
         concerns would occur.965
   (1138) In general, efficiencies that lead to reductions in variable or marginal costs are more
         likely to be relevant for the assessment of efficiencies than reductions in fixed costs as
         they are more likely to result in lower prices for consumers. Cost reductions, which
         merely result from anti-competitive reductions in output, cannot be considered as
         efficiencies benefiting consumers966.
   (1139) Any efficiencies, to be taken into account, have to be passed on to consumers. The
         scope for pass-on is often related to the existence of competitive pressure from the
         remaining firms in the market and from potential entry. The greater the possible
         negative effects on competition, the more the Commission has to be sure that the
         claimed efficiencies are substantial, likely to be realised, and to be passed on, to a
         sufficient degree, to consumers967.
   (1140) Second, efficiencies have to be merger-specific and it should not be possible for
         them to be achieved to a similar extent by less anti-competitive alternatives968.
   (1141) Finally, the efficiencies have to be verifiable so that the Commission can be
         reasonably certain that the efficiencies are likely to materialize, and be substantial
         enough to counteract a merger's potential harm to consumers969.
   (1142) It is incumbent upon the Notifying Parties to provide the Commission in due time
         with all the relevant information necessary to demonstrate that the claimed efficiencies
         are merger-specific and likely to be realised and that the efficiencies are likely to
         counteract any adverse effects on competition that might otherwise result from the
         merger, and that the claimed efficiencies therefore benefit consumers970.
   (1143) In this regard, the Horizontal Merger Guidelines further state that "it is highly
         unlikely that a merger leading to a market position approaching that of a monopoly, or
         leading to a similar level of market power, can be declared compatible with the
   963
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 77.
   964
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 78.
   965
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 79.
   966
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 80.
   967
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 84.
   968
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 85.
   969
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 86.
   970
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 87.
EN                                                     256                                          EN

          common market on the ground that efficiency gains would be sufficient to counteract
          its potential anti-competitive effects"971.
   (1144) In the light of these principles and of the very significant competition concerns
          identified in Section 11.2 of this Decision leading to the creation of a near monopoly in
          a number of markets, any efficiencies, even if they were found to be verifiable, merger-
          specific, and likely to benefit consumers, would have to be particularly substantial to
          outweigh the significant impediment to effective competition in the relevant markets.
     12.2. THE NOTIFYING PARTIES' EFFICIENCY CLAIMS
   (1145) The Notifying Parties claim that the notified transaction will benefit the users of the
          Notifying Parties’ cash and derivatives exchanges. They argue that it will reduce the
          costs of operating on these platforms for users, that users will have to pledge less
          collateral to clear transactions, and that users will benefit from greater liquidity and,
          therefore, lower implicit trading costs. The Notifying Parties argue that the liquidity
          effects of the notified transaction will spill over to benefit firms and consumers
          throughout the economy. They claim that firms will benefit from a reduced cost of
          capital that governments will be able to fund themselves more cheaply which will free
          resources for both public and private investment, and that consumers will benefit from
          greater employment, innovation and economic growth972.
   (1146) To substantiate these claims, five economic reports were submitted by the Notifying
          Parties973:
              •       Quantification of the reduction in the IT and user access costs of users of DB
                      and NYSE resulting from the consolidation of the trading and clearing
                      platforms of the Notifying Parties;
              •       Quantification of the annual collateral savings for users resulting from
                      incremental cross-margining opportunities from pooling their clearing
                      operations into a single clearing-house;
              •       Regressions to quantify the volume of liquidity impact of the integration of the
                      trading and clearing platforms of the Amsterdam, Brussels, Lisbon and Paris
                      cash exchanges between March 2002 and November 2003;
              •       Regressions to quantify the volume impact of integrating all Euronext’s
                      derivatives trading platforms into a single platform, Liffe CONNECT, between
                      March 2003 and November 2004; and
              •       Evaluation by reference to the existing literature on economics and finance of
                      the potential benefits of the notified transaction for the economy at large; in
                      particular, its implications on the cost of funding of firms and governments, on
                      investment and on economic growth.
   971
            Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 84.
   972
            Padilla, J. and Coppi, L., Compass Lexecon’s efficiency analyses: an overview, 5 September 2011, page
            4.
   973
            See footnote 961 of this Decision.
EN                                                      257                                                       EN

   (1147) In addition, the Notifying Parties expect to realise significant cost synergies,
         currently estimated at Euro […]* million per year, largely by consolidating duplicative
         cost centres.
   (1148) […]*.
   (1149) The Notifying Parties submitted further economic analysis as part of their response
         to the SO on 24 October 2011974. […]*. The Notifying Parties submitted another report
         on 16 November 2011 as a response to comments from the Commission during the Oral
         Hearing975. […]*. Finally, the Notifying Parties sent additional reports on 5 and 13
         December 2011976. […]*.
   (1150) It is incumbent upon the Notifying Parties to provide sufficient evidence to
         demonstrate that their efficiency claims are substantial, timely and benefit consumers.
         In order to allow the Commission to thoroughly assess of those claims, these must be
         made in "due time" and with "all the relevant information necessary to demonstrate
         that the claimed efficiencies are merger-specific and likely to be realised"977. It follows
         that the more complex and lengthy the set of information sent by the Notifying Parties,
         the more time is needed in order to allow the Commission to make a complete and
         thorough assessment and thus be sure that any claimed efficiencies are substantial,
         likely to be realised, and to be passed, to a sufficient degree, on to the consumer.
   (1151) The Best Practices for the submission of economic evidence and data collection in
         cases concerning the application of articles 101 and 102 TFEU and in merger cases978
         (the "Best Practices") establish the need for the Notifying Parties to submit economic
         evidence along with the codes and underlying data to replicate it in a timely manner.
         The Best Practices maintain that when these principles are not respected, they "will
         receive less consideration and are consequently unlikely to be given much weight" and
         "can constitute grounds for not taking it further into consideration".979 Nevertheless,
   974
           See footnote 962 of this Decision.
   975
           Compass Lexecon, " Response to Comments at oral hearing", 16 November 2011.
   976
           Compass Lexecon "The relevance of Euronext integration to the Transaction" 5 December 2011 and
           Compass Lexecon "Response to Chief Economist's Team's econometric analysis" 13 December 2011.
   977
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 87. Indeed, in this regard also Best Practices on the conduct
           of EC merger control proceedings at paragraph 18 sets out that " it is also recommended that notifying
           parties put forward, already at the pre-notification stage, any elements demonstrating that the merger
           leads to efficiency gains that they would like the Commission to take into account for the purposes of its
           competitive assessment of the proposed transaction. Such claims are likely to require extensive
           analysis. It is thus in the interests of the notifying parties to present these claims as early as possible to
           allow sufficient time for DG Competition to appropriately consider these elements in its assessment of a
           proposed transaction".
   978
           Commission Staff Working Paper entitled "Best practices for the submission of economic evidence and
           data collection in cases concerning the application of articles 101 and 102 TFEU and in merger cases",
           of 17 October 2011. This document was sent into public consultation on 6 January 2010.
   979
           Commission Staff Working Paper, Best practices for the submission of economic evidence and data
           collection in cases concerning the application of articles 101 and 102 TFEU and in merger cases, 17
           October 2011. Section 2.4 states: "Reporting and interpreting the results
           33. The results of economic and econometric analysis must be presented clearly, taking the reader
           through each step of the reasoning17. All empirical analysis, even descriptive statistics of relevant
           variables (e.g. price series) should be accompanied by all the documentation needed to allow timely
           replication, as well as a deep understanding of the methodology of any prior data management efforts.
           Reports which do not allow for replication and in particular econometric analysis not including the
EN                                                           258                                                          EN

         the Commission has undertaken a careful assessment of the submitted economic
         evidence.
   (1152) In this context, it is noted that the first detailed submission on efficiencies (namely,
         the five economic reports) was provided only 21 days after the initiation of
         proceedings, with subsequent supplemental submissions even later in the proceedings,
         with the last submission 90 working days after the initiation of proceedings – thus very
         late in the procedure. Given the lateness of the submissions together with the significant
         magnitude of the data provided, the highly complex nature of the submissions made,
         and the limited resources of the Commission to review the claims within the time
         constraints set out in Article 10 of the Merger Regulation, it is apparent that the
         efficiency claims had not been appropriately submitted.
   (1153) It is against this background that the Commission has reviewed the efficiency claims
         submitted by the Notifying Parties.
   (1154) On 23 November 2011, an economist meeting was held between the Notifying
         Parties' economists and the Commission services' economic experts at the request of the
         Notifying Parties. The purpose of the meeting, which was communicated and agreed
         beforehand, was to discuss three selected topics related to efficiencies: IT benefits,
         benefits from collateral savings and liquidity benefits.
   (1155) Following the meeting on 1 December 2011, the Notifying Parties sent the
         Commission a letter in which the Notifying Parties suggested that during the meeting,
         the Commission services' economic experts had presented new econometric work on
         the effects of the Euronext integration on liquidity and had refined their thinking on the
         position taken in the SO concerning the opportunity cost of capital.
   (1156) The Commission responded by a letter of 8 December 2011 informing the Notifying
         Parties that no additional data had been collected by the Commission, that any analysis
         undertaken by the Commission was based exclusively on the data provided by the
         Notifying Parties' economists and that any thinking outlined in the meeting was fully
         consistent with the position outlined in the SO.
   (1157) On liquidity benefits, the Commission pointed out that the analysis described by the
         Commission services' economic experts during the meeting was based on the Notifying
         Parties' data and confirmed the concerns expressed in the SO that the effect may be
         artificially generated by a trend. The relevant paragraphs in the SO that refer to this
           code and data in electronic form will receive less consideration and are consequently unlikely to be
           given much weight."
           "46. Where economic submissions rely on quantitative data the parties should provide the data and
           codes timely, in an appropriate format and in accordance with the criteria laid down in section 3 of this
           document. In particular, the absence of all the necessary elements needed for replication and
           assessment of an economic submission can constitute grounds for not taking it further into
           consideration."
           "ANNEX 1- STRUCTURE AND BASIC ELEMENTS OF A SOUND EMPIRICAL SUBMISSION (…)
           D. Results and implications
           • Parties should explain the details of their models, and share any documentation needed to allow
           timely replication (e.g. the programming code used to run the analysis)."
EN                                                      259                                                          EN

         issue are 590, 593-594 and 598 for cash and paragraphs 607, 608 and 610 for
         derivatives.
   (1158) On collateral benefits, during the meeting, the Commission services' economic
         experts reiterated what had been expressed in paragraph 573 of the SO that opportunity
         cost is the appropriate efficiency measure and also the position set out in paragraph 583
         of the SO that 5% was a strict upper bound that was merely used as a conservative
         assumption in a calculation in paragraph 583 of the SO. Also, the Commission services'
         economic experts clarified in the letter that paragraph 574 of the SO already
         distinguished between collateral posted in the form of cash and collateral posted in the
         form of securities and that paragraph 575 of the SO already stated the Commission's
         position that it was clear that the actual or "net" opportunity cost of holding collateral at
         the CCP was relatively small, compared to a scenario in which the blocked collateral is
         not generating revenues.
   (1159) The Notifying Parties responded on 13 December 2011 to clarify their continued
         position that the evidence produced at that meeting was new. Nevertheless, the
         Notifying Parties provided observations on how that evidence fails to call into question
         any of the results of the Notifying Parties' synergy analysis.
   (1160) The Commission analysed these observations carefully and assesses them in Section
         12.3 below.
    12.3. ASSESSMENT
     12.3.1. IT and user access cost savings
                      12.3.1.1.THE NOTIFYING PARTIES' EFFICIENCY CLAIMS
   (1161) The Notifying Parties claim that their customers will enjoy significant, direct, and
         annual recurrent benefits from the consolidation of the Notifying Parties’ trading and
         clearing platforms in terms of reduced IT and user access costs. The Notifying Parties
         argue that their customers will see the costs of operating on these platforms fall and
         estimate that customers will save Euro […]* million per year. More specifically,
         customers are expected to be able to reduce their costs for cash trading and derivatives
         trading and connection costs to the clearing-house, whereas Independent Service
         Providers ("ISVs") are also expected to reduce their costs. More specifically, those
         claimed cost savings are divided as follows:
   (1162) With respect to cash trading, the Notifying Parties estimate that internal savings
         likely to be achievable by the Notifying Parties’ users are expected to amount
         cumulatively to approximately Euro […]* million per year. This total cash trading cost
         saving is composed of the following
            -   […]* heavy users of exchange infrastructure at Euro […]*million each (Euro
                […]* million in total);
            -   […]* other users at Euro […]*million each (Euro […]* million in total).
   (1163) With respect to derivatives trading, the internal savings likely to be achievable by the
         Notifying Parties’ users flowing from the access simplifications are expected to amount
EN                                                 260                                                 EN

         cumulatively to approximately Euro […]* million per year. This total derivatives
         trading cost saving is composed of the following:
             -    […]* largest users at Euro […]*million each (Euro […]*million in total);
             -    […]* complex and large users: Euro […]* million each (Euro […]* million in
                  total);
             -    […]* large users: Euro […]* million each (Euro […]* million in total); and
             -    […]* remaining users Euro […]* to Euro […]* million each (Euro […]* million
                  in total).
   (1164) In addition, the Notifying Parties claim that ISVs will also benefit from cost savings
         because of the need to only implement one release rather than two and that the overall
         cost savings for ISVs will be around Euro […]* million per year.
   (1165) Finally, the Notifying Parties estimate a further Euro […]* million IT and user
         access cost savings associated with the consolidation of clearing-houses and the lower
         charges for connectivity that this entails.
                         12.3.1.2.ANALYSIS
   12.3.1.2.1.       Verifiability
   (1166) In the SO, the Commission questioned the verifiability of the cost savings in the
         areas of IT and user access980. The Commission argued that there were no means to
         assess the plausibility, reliability, and representativeness of the interview-based cost
         estimates as presented by the Notifying Parties.
   (1167) In their response to the SO and to the Commission's requests for information of 3 and
         17 November 2011, the Notifying Parties provided further detail on the number and
         nature of discussions and email exchanges they had with customers, that serve to
         substantiate the estimated cost reductions. Given that most of the relevant cost
         information is in the possession of their customers and the Notifying Parties claim that
         the latter are reluctant to share information about their precise IT and access costs, the
         Notifying Parties argue they cannot be expected to estimate the IT and user access cost
         efficiencies precisely981. Moreover, cost savings for consolidating trading platforms are
         said to vary significantly and in ways difficult to observe982. As a result, only "rough"
         data in some instances could be gathered983. The Notifying Parties argue that the
   980
           See SO, paragraph 585.
   981
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, , paragraph 85 and 86.
   982
           Compass Lexecon (2011) "Efficiencies from the proposed Transaction" of 24 October 2011, page 29,
           first bullet point.
   983
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies,, paragraph 86: "When attempting to collect the
           relevant data, the Parties, unsurprisingly, faced a certain measure of reluctance from customers to share
           information about their precise IT and access costs. In instances when the Parties were nevertheless able
           to obtain (rough) data, they often had to accommodate their customers’ wish not to be identified in the
           remainder of the proceedings. While the quality of their final estimate is inevitably constrained by these
           limitations, the essential premise of this efficiency, i.e. that the consolidation of trading and clearing
EN                                                        261                                                         EN

         Commission could and should have quantified the efficiencies more precisely through
         questionnaires and argues that an unrealistic burden has been placed on them984.
   (1168) First of all, the Commission considers that any alleged difficulties to discuss with IT
         users the estimated cost reductions is not a reasonable justification to waive the
         Notifying Parties' obligation to provide the necessary evidence to substantiate any
         efficiency claims and / or to, at least approximately, quantify the importance of such
         efficiencies. In this respect it can be reasonably expected that the Notifying Parties
         either independently or with the support of external consultants or experts would
         normally evaluate the prospects of cost savings and synergies even before the
         transaction is implemented985. The Horizontal Merger Guidelines further indicate that
         "when the necessary data are not available to allow for a precise quantitative analysis,
         it must be possible to foresee a clearly identifiable positive impact on consumers, not a
         marginal one."986
   (1169) The Commission observes that the Notifying Parties have estimated the actual
         internal and third-party cost savings enjoyed by the Notifying Parties' customers by
         extrapolating estimates that follow from sending out a very limited number of ad hoc
         and poorly-designed emails to selected customers with tight turnaround deadlines987. In
         this respect, the Notifying Parties' economic experts state that they have not been
         involved in the discussions with customers, nor have they vetted the cost savings as
         estimated by the interviewees988. In other words, the Notifying Parties' economic
         experts have estimated the claimed savings on the basis of the Notifying Parties
         conveying to them general numbers based on a limited number of unstructured emails.
         The Commission does not consider that this meets the requisite standard for the basis of
         an efficiency claim.
   (1170) There are […]* customers that are members of both cash platforms and that hence
         would benefit from claimed cost savings following the notified transaction. The group
         of customers is subdivided into two member categories (heavy users and other users).
         Selected customers were asked how much each software release implementation would
         cost them, and the Notifying Parties have listed a number of concrete cost reduction
         estimates989. It is entirely unclear to the Commission where any of these estimates come
           platforms will mechanically lead to IT and access cost savings, is neither doubtful nor challenged by the
           Commission."
   984
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 88.
   985
           The Notifying Parties argue that the cost synergies achieved through the notified transaction "have been
           identified in documents pre-dating the Transaction" and refer to NYX's internal presentation to its
           Board of Directors (see Form CO, Section 9 (Efficiencies), paragraph 9.60). The Commission considers
           that this presentation includes some high-level statements, but no meaningful analysis of any cost
           savings. The "Estimated synergies" section of this document shows that at this stage the Notifying
           Parties were unable to quantify the possible synergies (especially in the clearing and market operations
           areas) and provided a rough estimate of […]* US $ "subject to further due diligence" (see slide 18)".
   986
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 86.
   987
           The 7 emails that are supposed to substantiate the cost savings are provided in the Notifying Parties'
           response to the Commission's information request of 3 November 2011, and in particular Annex 2.
           Annex 4 seems to contain transcripts of 7 further discussions.
   988
           Padilla and Coppi (2011), "User benefits in the areas of IT and user access", 5 September 2011,
           footnote 18, page 8.
   989
           In particular as stated on page 8-9 of Padilla and Coppi (2011), "User benefits in the areas of IT and
           user access", 5 September 2011.
EN                                                       262                                                         EN

         from and a follow-up request for information of 17 November 2011 did not result in
         any guidance or explanation as to the origin and reliability of the estimates provided. In
         particular, there was no mapping of the evidence in the file into the claimed efficiencies
         (as requested by the Commission in its request for information of 17 November 2011),
         instead only general reference is made to a large number of discussions with users and
         stakeholders and feedback from presentations by the Notifying Parties to several cash
         users (see reply to request for information of 3 November 2011). In sum, it is entirely
         unclear how the reported claimed savings per member per group (that are then
         extrapolated to the entire group and summed across groups) have been constructed. As
         a result, the evidence submitted by the Notifying Parties does not allow the
         Commission to verify the claimed cost savings990.
   (1171) There are […]* customers that are members of both derivatives platforms and that
         hence would benefit from the claimed cost savings following the notified transaction.
         The group is subdivided into four member categories (largest members, complex and
         large members, large members, and remaining members). Across the four categories,
         DB reports written feedback (emails) from seven customers to substantiate the claimed
         estimated IT savings by customers. The deadline by which users were asked to respond
         is not reported, but where the deadline can be identified from the emails, it appears
         extremely short (less than two days and sometimes less than a day). The questions were
         phrased very generally and informally without any proposed template to ensure
         comparability in responses991. As a result, it is to be expected that the responses are not
         consistent (in terms of results, definitions used, detail, scope and coverage across
         members) and do not allow to average cost estimates in any meaningful way992.
         Whereas the reply to the request for information of 17 November 2011 does explain
         how some of the numbers in the seven emails have been mapped onto the ultimate cost
         reduction estimates, the mapping is largely discretionary and important entries in the
         final retained estimates are still left out993.
   (1172) In sum, it is again entirely unclear how the reported savings per member per group
         (that are then extrapolated to the entire group and summed across groups) have been
   990
           As reported in Padilla and Coppi (2011), "User benefits in the areas of IT and user access", pages 8-9.
   991
           Questions read as follows "(i) Do you think your firm will achieve significant savings as a result of the
           planned platform consolidation across trading and clearing for NYX and DB and how much would you
           estimate these savings to be? (ii) Do you think your firm will achieve significant savings as a result of
           standardisation of business processes across trading and clearing for NYX and DB?" See page 3 of the
           Notifying Parties' response to the Commission's information request of 3 November. "As discussed we
           would very much appreciate if you could share with us your estimation on internal costs for the
           implementation/roll out of a Eurex Release (this should comprise cost drivers such as software
           development, testing, integration, end to end test with the exchange, etc.)" and "Question is how much
           (approx) the implementation of a Eurex release would be for your firm i.e. what is the potential saving
           were there only to be a single release per annum.". See page 1 and 2 of Annex 2 of the Notifying
           Parties' response to the Commission's information request of 3 November 2011.
   992
           See the Notifying Parties' response to the Commission's RFI of 3 November 2011, Annexes 2 and 4.
   993
           .[…]*. The paucity and inconsistency of the reported results are at odds with the following claim by the
           Notifying Parties "In light of the consistency and similarity in the figures provided by users, the Parties
           are confident that these estimates are representative of the IT and user access savings that users will
           realize as a result of the Transaction." (see page 1 of the Notifying Parties' response to the
           Commission's RFI of 3 November 2011).
EN                                                        263                                                          EN

         constructed. As a result, the submitted evidence does not allow the Commission to
         verify the claimed cost savings994.
   (1173) The Notifying Parties claim that ISVs as a group will enjoy Euro […]* million of
         cost savings per year as only one release needs to be implemented per year rather than
         two. The Notifying Parties submit that they believe that a large proportion of ISV
         savings (around Euro […]* million) will be passed on to end-users, since all ISVs using
         both trading platforms will receive the cost savings, and the ISV market is highly
         competitive. It is again not specified and hence entirely unclear how the estimation of
         the cost saving is made.
   (1174) Finally, the Notifying Parties claim a further Euro […]* million IT and user access
         cost savings associated with the consolidation of clearing-houses and the lower charges
         for connectivity that this entails. The Notifying Parties allocated overlap members to
         different bandwidth tiers according to the type and size of the required connection to
         the LCH SA clearing-house. Savings from disposing of the LCH SA bandwidth charges
         are subsequently estimated by multiplying the overlap members by the respective tier-
         specific bandwidth charges. Total annual savings from fewer connection and
         membership charges are estimated to amount to Euro […]* million.
   (1175) While it cannot be excluded that there may be a positive impact on customers from
         avoiding duplication of software maintenance, software updates, and connection
         charges, it is also likely that there will be costs, at least during any period of transition
         and migration995. Given this, and the lack of reliability based on the significant
         deficiencies in the evidence submitted by the Notifying Parties, it is concluded that the
         claimed cost savings have not been substantiated to the required standard.
   (1176) Therefore, the Commission considers that the claimed IT and user access benefits are
         not verifiable.
   12.3.1.2.2.      Merger specificity
   (1177) The Notifying Parties argue that it is unlikely that these savings could be achieved
         without the merger as it is very unlikely that the Notifying Parties could have accepted,
         absent the notified transaction, to merge or outsource their trading platforms, which is a
         key requirement to deliver these efficiencies996. The Commission considers that it
         cannot reasonably be inferred from the submitted evidence that the IT and user access
   994
          Padilla and Coppi (2011), "User benefits in the areas of IT and user access", pages 10-11.
   995
          See for example the response of the following customer: "Des coûts car il faudra migrer noter accès
          Liffe vers Eurex (ou inversement) et ce ne sera surement pas sans couts de DEV, ni gestion de projets."
          (see the Notifying Parties' response to the Commission's information request of 3 November, Annex 2,
          email 5) or "One time cost upgrading Basildon: 50.000 euro (2 core switches); One time cost moving
          Frankfurt to Basildon: 20.000 euro (shipping, installing, configuration, incl. man hours); one time cost
          upgrading own London hub (InterXion): 50.000 (2 core switches); one time cost software development
          1: 15.000 euro …" (see the Notifying Parties' response to the Commission's information request of 3
          November, Annex 4) and "Extra yearly cost infrastructure 1: 105.000 euro a year, getting an extra
          cabinet in Basildon; Extra yearly cost infrastructure 2: 36.000 euro a year, upgrading bandwidth in
          Basildon" (see the Notifying Parties' response to the Commission's information request of 3 November,
          Annex 4).
   996
          Form CO, Section 9, paragraphs 9.60 and 9.61.
EN                                                      264                                                        EN

         benefits would materialise if the merger were to be completed. Therefore, it is not
         necessary to examine whether these claimed efficiencies could have been realised
         absent the notified transaction.
   12.3.1.2.3.      Consumer benefits
   (1178) The Notifying Parties argue that the benefits of lower implementation and
         maintenance costs accrue directly to users through reduced internal and third-party
         costs.
   (1179) In the SO, the Commission specified that any claimed efficiencies may only partially
         remain with customers, given the merged entity's ability to increase any explicit fee on
         the set of complementary products and services that the merged entity would offer to
         customers. The merged entity's incentive to leave efficiency gains from such cost
         savings with customers depends on the existence of competitive pressure from the
         remaining firms in the market and from potential entry. If no such or only limited
         pressure exists, the merged entity can in principle increase any explicit fee so as to
         partially or wholly claw back any cost savings at customer level. Given the fact that
         post-merger, no significant competitive pressure would exist in the relevant products in
         the derivatives trading and clearing markets concerned, such market power would have
         a price effect which would outweigh any claimed efficiency. Recoupment possibilities
         would not have to be limited to IT connection charges, but could also take place
         through membership fees or transaction fees for derivatives trading and clearing as
         these services are complementary services. To the extent that there were any benefits,
         these would only accrue to customers if it could safely be assumed that other total price
         components are left unchanged, which is not the case.
   (1180) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties claim that the notion that such
         benefits can be clawed back is irrelevant and erroneous997. The Notifying Parties argue
         that, in contrast with cost savings realised by the Notifying Parties, in order to benefit
         users, these efficiencies do not need to be "passed on" by the combined entity through
         price reductions, but they directly lower costs incurred by customers998. The Notifying
         Parties claim that the Commission is conflating its competitive assessment with its
         efficiencies' assessment999.
   (1181) At the Oral Hearing, the Commission explained that the question of pass-on is
         relevant regardless of whether the benefit accrues on the producer or consumer side as
         is also known from the theory of tax incidence1000,1001. The Commission clarified at the
         Oral Hearing that it was not conflating its competitive assessment with its efficiencies
         assessment. As in standard merger analysis, the first step is to assess the merger's
         unilateral effects considering the coming together of the two firms without any changes
   997
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 81.
   998
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 142.
   999
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 148.
   1000
           The key concept in the theory of tax incidence is that the tax incidence or tax burden does not depend
           on where the revenue is collected, but on the price elasticity of demand and price elasticity of supply.
   1001
           Even if cost savings accrue on the side of the customers, if it is clawed back by the merged entity, then
           it cannot be taken into account as efficiency. See also paragraph 79, 80 and 84 of the Horizontal Merger
           Guidelines.
EN                                                        265                                                        EN

         in costs or technology. The second step assesses efficiencies and how the price adjusts
         following cost savings either on the firm or the customer side. This latter price effect is
         what is commonly called pass-on and is separate from any price effect considered under
         unilateral effects in the first step.
   (1182) The Notifying Parties further submit in their response to the SO that the Notifying
         Parties would neither have the incentive, nor the ability to wholly claw back the user
         benefits. The Notifying Parties state that if efficiencies are only "partially" clawed back
         by price increases, customers will be better off as a result of the merger1002.
   (1183) The Commission agrees that if efficiencies are only "partially" clawed back,
         consumers would indeed face a net benefit. However, this observation implies that only
         part of the quantified amount cannot be considered as a consumer benefit, but not the
         full quantified amount.
   (1184) As an attachment to their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties submitted a paper
         by Compass Lexecon which provided further detail on the merged entity's ability and
         incentive to wholly claw back benefits1003. This paper presents four main arguments.
         First, the paper argues that efficiencies benefiting users of markets where no
         competitive issues have been found should be taken into account in the overall
         assessment of the notified transaction given that there is a significant overlap of
         customers in different markets. Second, the paper claims a proper analysis of the
         economics of user benefit capture (as opposed to the economics of cost-efficiency pass-
         through) suggests that a very significant portion of benefits will remain with users.
         Third, the paper argues that in order to capture customer benefits, price rises would
         need to be so large so as to be implausible. Finally, the paper argues that in order to
         fully capture user benefits, the combined entity would need to be able to price
         discriminate perfectly between customers, which is extremely unlikely
   (1185) The Commission considers that, given the complementarity of IT services and
         trading services and given the fact that the Notifying Parties can price discriminate at
         least in part1004, it appears likely that, to the extent that there are any IT and user
         savings, pass-on to users would only be partial.
   (1186) Therefore, the Commission concludes that, to the extent there may be any IT and
         user access savings at all (see Section 12.3.1.2.1), there would be some pass-on to (that
         is net benefits left with) customers, but the size of this effect cannot be determined on
         the basis of the available data.
                       12.3.1.3.CONCLUSION ON IT AND USER ACCESS COST SAVINGS
   (1187) Therefore, the Commission concludes that the efficiencies claimed by the Notifying
         Parties in the area of IT and user access costs are not verifiable. Even if they were
         verifiable, it is unclear whether such savings would be merger-specific and how much
         of the savings would be passed on to (that is net benefits left with) customers.
   1002
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 153.
   1003
           Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the proposed transaction" of 24 October 2011.
   1004
           See the discussion in Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.4. of this Decision.
EN                                                        266                                        EN

       12.3.2. Collateral Savings
                           12.3.2.1.THE NOTIFYING PARTIES' CLAIMS
   (1188) The Notifying Parties claim that the notified transaction will allow their common
          members to achieve significant collateral savings by allowing them to pool their
          clearing operations into a single CCP, thereby bringing together their highly correlated,
          risk-offsetting products. The Notifying Parties have simulated the anticipated savings
          from the notified transaction in each product area on the basis of the savings currently
          achieved by the Notifying Parties with respect to similar product combinations. An
          extrapolation of these anticipated savings to the Notifying Parties’ overall collateral
          requirements results in an estimate of approximately Euro 3.1 billion claimed direct
           collateral savings for customers.
                           12.3.2.2.ANALYSIS
   12.3.2.2.1.         Verifiability
   (1189) In the SO, the Commission acknowledged that the merger if implemented could give
           rise to lower collateral requirements for joint clearing members as a result of additional
           cross-margining opportunities within an enlarged clearing pool. However, the level of
           any actual savings on behalf of the exchange members that would derive from the lower
           collateral requirements, in terms of the total cost of trading1005, were deemed to be
           unclear and most likely greatly overestimated for a number of reasons.
   (1190) First of all, in the SO the Commission considered that the Euro 3.1 billion in
           collateral savings initially claimed do not represent actual efficiencies for clearing
           members (customers): it is not the collateral savings but the opportunity cost of holding
           cash or securities posted as collateral which is the relevant measure of actual cost
           savings from lower collateral requirements1006. Therefore, it is inappropriate to put the
           nominal collateral savings on the same footing as, for example, the claimed IT and user
           access cost savings, as the former still need to be translated into actual reduced
           opportunity costs for customers. Whereas the Notifying Parties state1007 that none of
           their submissions has created such confusion and that references have always been
           made to collateral savings and not cost savings, the Commission observes1008 that the
   1005
             See the discussion in Section 2.1.2 of this Decision.
   1006
             See SO, paragraph 573.
   1007
             Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 65.
   1008
             Initially, the Notifying Parties were ambiguous about this point. For example, in sheet 5 of the 8
             September 2011 Padilla and Coppi presentation "Efficiencies from the NYSE Euronext/Deutsche Börse
             transaction" entitled "Significant efficiencies accrue directly to users in the form of reduced cost of
             trading" IT & user access benefits ("direct savings of €[50-100]* million per year") are being listed
             alongside cross-margining benefits ("€3.1 billion in collateral savings") and liquidity benefits ("up to
             […]* reduction in bid-ask spread (cash) and […]* increase in volume (derivatives)"). On the same
             sheet, the words cross-margining "benefits" and cross-margining "efficiencies" are being used to
             describe the €3.1 billion in collateral savings. A similar ambiguity holds for example in paragraph 4 of
             the Notifying Parties' response to the 6(1)c decision "Transaction-related efficiencies", 5 September
             2011.
EN                                                          267                                                       EN

         Notifying Parties have repeatedly grouped together annual cost savings with collateral
         savings estimates. Given that the Notifying Parties explicitly agree1009 that the
         opportunity cost is the relevant metric if there is a desire to quantify the efficiency as a
         cost saving, it is surprising that the Notifying Parties did not submit their own
         quantification of the opportunity cost saving. The Commission stated in the SO that
         opportunity cost was the appropriate efficiency measure and that the opportunity cost of
         holding collateral was relatively small given that the blocked collateral generates
         revenues1010.
   (1191) Given that Eurex Clearing pays interest to its clearing members that provide cash
         collateral and given that the clearing member remains the legal and economic (coupon-
         or dividend-receiving) owner of the pledged securities in the case of pledged securities,
         the actual benefit of freeing up collateral or, alternatively, the actual opportunity cost of
         having collateral locked up at the CCP would only represent a fraction of the claimed
         Euro 3.1 billion nominal collateral savings.
   (1192) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties acknowledged that the opportunity
         cost of holding cash or collateral, rather than collateral savings as such, determine
         actual cost savings for their customers1011. The Notifying Parties do not estimate, assess
         or propose what a reasonable opportunity cost would be for the pledged cash and
         collateral, but they are of the opinion that a 5% opportunity cost (which the
         Commission had put forward in the SO as a conservative and strict upper bound) or
         even a lower opportunity cost would still result in large efficiencies1012.
   (1193) The Commission maintains that a 5% opportunity cost would in fact be conservative
         and a strict upper bound for the actual benefit derived by customers from having to
         pledge less cash and security collateral. An opportunity cost of 5% would lead to a cost
         saving of Euro 155 million if the Euro 3.1 billion claimed nominal collateral savings
         would be taken as the basis.
   (1194) Indeed, cash that is not pledged as collateral at Eurex Clearing can typically be
         invested risk-free by members as overnight deposits in the relevant money markets (for
         EUR, GBP, USD, CHF, etc.). However, when the cash is pledged as collateral, Eurex
         Clearing also invests it overnight and pays the accrued interest to the clearing member,
         after withholding a small fee ([…]* basis points for EUR and CHF, and […]* basis
         points for USD and GBP cash collateral)1013. On this basis the relevant benefit from not
         having to pledge cash balances as collateral (or alternatively the opportunity cost for
         having to pledge cash balances) is […]* basis points for EUR and CHF and […]* basis
         points for USD and GBP cash balances respectively. Note that […]* basis points ([…]*
         basis points) would be […]* of the 5% opportunity cost that was cautiously and
         conservatively retained by the Commission to estimate the actual cost savings to
         members.
   1009
          Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the proposed transaction" of 24 October 2011, page 60.
   1010
          See SO, paragraph 575.
   1011
          Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the proposed transaction" of 24 October 2011, page 60.
   1012
          Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 63.
   1013
          See Form CO,Annex C.34.
EN                                                      268                                            EN

   (1195) Securities that are pledged as collateral to Eurex Clearing still yield income and
         coupons to the exchange members, as the economic and legal ownership is retained by
         them (Eurex Clearing does not withhold a fee for non-cash collateral), hence the benefit
         from not having to pledge the securities (opportunity cost of having to pledge them)
         may seem to be zero. However, the securities that are locked up as collateral can no
         longer be pledged or repoed1014 (in order to access collateralised borrowing facilities
         from the private sector or the central bank). If members for example were to repo the
         security to, say, the ECB in return for liquidity, they could avoid tapping unsecured
         capital markets. The benefit to the members would thus amount to the marginal cost of
         capital of the members reduced by the cost1015 of repoing the security (publicly or
         privately). Importantly, the ECB (as well as any private counterparty) will apply a
         haircut1016 to the pledged security in order to manage its risk. The applied haircut can
         go up to and even exceed 50% of the pledged asset's face value depending on the
         security, originator, residual maturity, and rating of the pledged security1017. In sum, it
         would seem that the firm's marginal cost of capital net of the cost of repoing the
         securities would in any case be a strict upper bound for the benefit of not having to
         pledge securities (as it corresponds to a zero haircut). A strict lower bound may result
         from applying a large haircut to the upper bound.
   (1196) Following the above logic and based on a 5% cost of capital assumption, a
         reasonable and weighted opportunity cost across cash and securities collateral would lie
         in a range of […]*. This range corresponds to [Euro [40-60]* million; Euro [100-120]*
         million] of cost savings for customers, compared to the claimed Euro [120-180]*
         million. Whereas the true opportunity cost is collateral specific and cannot be estimated
         precisely with the available information, the Commission considers that the weighted
         opportunity cost of the lower margin requirements and hence the ultimate efficiency for
         members as a whole may lie in the [Euro [40-60]* million; Euro [100-120]* million]
         range if the Euro 3.1 billion claimed nominal collateral range are taken as a basis for the
         calculation of the opportunity cost. All these numbers are proxies and only serve as
         estimation of the order of magnitude of savings related to increased cross-margining
         opportunities. Under current market conditions, the savings are most likely in this
         range.
   (1197) Secondly, in the SO the Commission acknowledged that a significant number of
         users are members of both Notifying Parties' CCPs and that derivatives contracts across
   1014
           A repurchase agreement, also known as a repo, is the sale of securities together with an agreement for
           the seller to buy back the securities at a later date. The repurchase price should be greater than the
           original sale price, the difference effectively representing interest, sometimes called the repo rate. The
           party that originally buys the securities effectively acts as a lender. The original seller is effectively
           acting as a borrower, using their security as collateral for a secured cash loan at a fixed rate of interest.
   1015
           The cost of repoing the security at the ECB amounts to 1.25%. The non-conventional long term
           refinancing operations (LTRO) are fixed-rate full-allotment tenders introduced by the ECB following
           the financial crisis to allow banks to receive liquidity for maturities up to 12 months at an annual
           borrowing cost of currently 1.25% against appropriate and prudently valued (i.e. haircutted) collateral.
   1016
           The percentage by which an asset's market value is reduced for the purpose of calculating capital
           requirement, margin and collateral levels in order to have a cushion in case the market value falls.
   1017
           See the ECB website for a sample of applicable haircuts depending on the type of security, originator,
           rating, and residual
           maturity.http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/2010/html/sp090728_1annex.en.pdf?33bd383889552c274fd8
           610b476a17d8 viewed on 26 January 2012.
EN                                                        269                                                            EN

         exchanges may sometimes be characterised by a significant degree of positive
         correlation1018. However, in the SO, the Commission stated that it was not reported to
         what extent users actually hold significant positions in opposite directions (for instance,
         a long position in FTSE derivatives against a short position in Euro Stoxx derivatives),
         which is a prerequisite for collateral offsets1019 to take place given positive correlations.
         In the SO, the Commission pointed out that no information had been provided on
         positions of users who are members of both Notifying Parties' CCPs1020. More
         generally, the Commission argued in the SO that without more granular underlying
         data, the whole simulation exercise largely remains a black box. As a result, the
         Commission concluded that the plausibility, reliability, and representativeness of the
         collateral savings estimates could not be properly assessed by the Commission.
   (1198) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties provide a stylised snapshot of
         position data for all members and in all products showing that a substantial proportion
         of joint CCP members hold positions in opposite directions within each asset class. The
         percentage of members with positions in opposite directions in the three CCPs
         concerned among members who hold positions in several CCPs amounts to […]*% for
         interest rate derivatives products, […]*% for equity index derivative products, and for
         equity derivatives lies in a range between a low of […]*% for oil and gas equity
         derivative products and a high of […]*% for real estate equity derivative products1021.
   (1199) The Commission recognises that this evidence suggests that there is a significant
         proportion of members with offsetting positions between the three CCPs, but considers
         that this evidence does not allow the Commission to verify to what extent the notified
         transaction would lead to reduced margin requirements, as the latter also depends on the
         symmetry (or lack thereof) of the offsetting positions in volume terms. In order to be
         able to estimate actual offsets, the volumes of the offsetting exposures per product
         category would need to be considered, which the Notifying Parties did not provide.
   (1200) The Notifying Parties claim1022 that they are reluctant to share confidential data on
         actual member positions (so that actual offsets can be computed), but this
         notwithstanding, the Notifying Parties' approach of extrapolating findings based on
         samples of data and discretionary assumptions may not lead to accurate estimates of the
         amount of margin requirements that will be saved following the notified transaction.
   1018
           See SO, paragraph 576.
   1019
           It should also be noted that in the calculations, the current practice at Eurex Clearing […]* (see footnote
           12 of the 5 September 2011 submission "Cross-margining efficiencies induced by the Deutsche
           Borse/NYSE Euronext merger" by the Notifying Parties' economic consultants). […]* Also for this
           reason, the claimed margin savings may be overestimated.
   1020
           See SO, paragraph 576.
   1021
           Compass Lexecon, "Efficiencies from the Proposed Transaction", 24 October 2011, page 61, table 3.
   1022
           Padilla and Coppi, "Cross-margining efficiencies induced by the Deutsche Börse/NYSE Euronext
           merger", 5 September 2011, page 9. "A precise assessment of the collateral reductions that joint
           members would enjoy as a result of the Transaction would require: exchanging information relating to
           the current positions of joint members on the Parties' respective clearing houses to obtain their
           combined portfolio across exchanges… Moreover, the Parties are reluctant to share confidential data
           on member positions at this stage. Therefore a precise calculation of the additional cross-margining
           offsets is not currently possible."
EN                                                         270                                                         EN

   (1201) Thirdly, in the SO, the Commission stated that the collateral savings were calculated
         using the current risk management model of Eurex whereas a new Portfolio Based Risk
         Management Method (Project Prisma) was introduced to the Eurex Clearing Executive
         Board […]*1023. The Commission considers that, in theory, the right counterfactual
         would be to base the calculations on the new portfolio wide model. However, given that
         the new clearing model is not yet available, it would be unreasonable to require its use.
         In any case, the net benefit of basing the calculation on the new model is uncertain
         because while it could lead to further margin offsets for products traded in-house, it
         could also lead to further opportunities across trading platforms.
   (1202) Despite the fact that margin requirement savings are not quantified to the extent
         expected, the Commission acknowledges that the notified transaction is likely to lead to
         some collateral savings, although it is likely to be at a level lower than the figure of
         Euro [120-180]* million put forward by the Notifying Parties. Under current market
         conditions, and on the assumption that the merged entity, notwithstanding its market
         power, would allow for the described offsets between the correlated products
         concerned, the savings would most likely be in the range of approximately Euro [40-
         60]* million to Euro [100-120]* million.
   (1203) The Commission therefore considers that the efficiencies associated with the claimed
         collateral savings are verifiable, but very likely lower than the claimed Euro [120-180]*
         million.
   12.3.2.2.2.     Merger specificity
   (1204) In the Form CO, the Notifying Parties claimed that the collateral savings are merger-
         specific1024. The Notifying Parties argued it is highly unlikely that they would be able to
         generate comparable capital efficiencies in the same time frame without the notified
         transaction, if at all. They submitted that although alternative solutions can be
         envisaged in theory, they are unrealistic in practice and would not deliver equivalent
         efficiencies. For illustration, they described two alternative solutions: interoperating
         CCPs and outsourcing1025.
   (1205) In the decision opening the proceeding, it was concluded that, even though the
         market investigation provided indications that potential benefits associated with lower
         collateral requirements due to the increased margin pool of the merged entity could
         arise from the merger, the Notifying Parties had, at that stage, not provided sufficient
         evidence that any such efficiencies meet the criteria of the Horizontal Merger
         Guidelines, and in particular that they could not be achieved through less anti-
         competitive alternatives1026.
   1023
           See SO, paragraph 579.
   1024
           Form CO, Section 9, paragraph 9.5.
   1025
           Form CO, Section 9, paragraph 9.20.
   1026
           Decision opening the proceeding, paragraph 304.
EN                                                    271                                            EN

                            12.3.2.2.2.1.       The Notifying Parties' claims
   (1206) In their response to the decision opening the proceedings, the Notifying Parties
         provided their analysis on whether the collateral savings could be achieved through less
         restrictive means by considering interoperability, outsourcing and margin offset
         agreements1027.
           a. Interoperability
   (1207) The Notifying Parties pointed out that interoperability carries a number of risks and
         challenges that do not allow the same efficiencies which will flow from the notified
         transaction to be achieved, particularly for derivatives markets. They pointed to two
         risks which in their view bear particular consideration: interoperability creates
         significant exposures between CCPs and if CCPs contribute to each other’s default
         fund, both CCPs will be exposed to the additional risk of loss mutualisation arising
         from the default of the other1028.
   (1208) The Notifying Parties submitted that for these and other reasons, industry
         participants have expressed scepticism about the feasibility of interoperability between
         CCPs1029. In particular in respect to derivatives, interoperability among CCPs carries
         additional risks and complexities that raise questions about feasibility1030. In this
         respect, the Notifying Parties quoted the words of Roger Liddell, the former Chief
         Executive Officer of LCH.Clearnet, “I don’t think we’ll ever see interoperability in
         derivatives clearing, the risks from contagion are just not worth the benefits.”1031
           b. Outsourcing
   (1209) The Notifying Parties explained that outsourcing of clearing services can be
         implemented in certain circumstances, but that cross-margining usually does not take
         place in the context of such outsourcing arrangements1032.
   (1210) The Notifying Parties indicated that an exception to this is the CME/CBOT
         agreement concluded in 2003, where CBOT outsourced its clearing to CME through a
         Common Clearing Link, and which allowed cross-margining. The Notifying Parties
         argue that it is difficult to consider an outsourcing agreement such as the CME/CBOT
         agreement as a realistic alternative to the notified transaction1033.
   1027
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings - Transaction related efficiencies.
   1028
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 25.
   1029
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 26.
   1030
           Notifying Parties' response to Article 6.1.c decision – "Transaction related efficiencies", paragraph 26
   1031
           See FOW, Forget Interoperability in Derivatives Clearing, July 23, 2010, at
           http://www.fow.com/Article/2637026/Forget-interoperability-in-derivatives-clearing-says-Liddell.html,
           viewed on 25 January 2012.
   1032
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 27.
   1033
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 28.
EN                                                        272                                                        EN

   (1211) First, the Notifying Parties claim that control over the liquidity represented by open
         interest is regarded by exchanges and CCPs as critical to the success of their businesses.
         It is therefore unlikely that, absent the merger, the Notifying Parties would have agreed
         to an outsourcing agreement on derivatives that would allow for cross-margining. The
         CME/CBOT agreement eventually resulted in the merger of the two exchanges. Thus, it
         was not an alternative to achieving efficiencies through a merger; rather, it was a step
         towards, and similar in many respects, to a full combination1034.
   (1212) Second, the Notifying Parties submit that the CME/CBOT agreement took place
         within a single regulatory jurisdiction. In the Union, cross-border outsourcing would
         create significantly more regulatory difficulties. In the absence of a single regulatory,
         capital, customer, and bankruptcy framework, these complications could not easily be
         lifted1035.
   (1213) Finally, the Notifying Parties referred to Annex C.31 to Form CO, where it is
         explained that […]*1036.
           c. Margin offset agreements
   (1214) The Notifying Parties state that, in theory, they could agree to cross-margin their
         collateral requirements in a margin offset agreement, without interoperability or
         outsourcing. According to the Notifying Parties, this scenario is, however, very unlikely
         in practice and would in any event not deliver the same efficiencies as the notified
         transaction1037.
   (1215) First, the Notifying Parties argue that they would have no incentive to conclude such
         agreement absent the merger, […]*1038.
   (1216) Second, the Notifying Parties claimed that from a market risk perspective, margin
         offset agreements are complex arrangements since they imply a joint risk management
         and liquidation process for cross-margined positions.
   (1217) Third, the Notifying Parties submitted that the number and scope of past cross-
         margining arrangements have been limited. For instance, the past cross-margining
         agreement between LCH and the CME, which was launched in 2000 and terminated in
         2010, only covered certain instruments of the respective exchanges (selected STIR
         contracts on CME and LIFFE). Under this agreement, collateral was held separately at
         each respective clearing organisation (“two-pots” system), which exposed each CCP to
   1034
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 29.
   1035
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 30.
   1036
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 31.
   1037
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 32.
   1038
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 33.
EN                                                       273                                                         EN

         the other’s default risk. According to the Notifying Parties, such an agreement would
         deliver much more limited benefits than the notified transaction1039.
   (1218) Fourth, the Notifying Parties claim that margin offset agreements may require
         substantial maintenance costs, in addition to the costs they both incur for their internal
         cross-margining operations1040.
   (1219) The Notifying Parties concluded that, as with outsourcing and interoperability,
         margin offset agreements raise very difficult commercial and technical issues and can
         therefore not be considered as a credible alternative to deliver capital savings of the
         same magnitude as those generated by the notified transaction. The Notifying Parties
         therefore argue that absent other credible alternatives, efficiencies generated by the
         notified transaction must therefore be considered as merger-specific1041.
   (1220) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties reiterated their position that they
         would not be able to generate comparable collateral savings without the notified
         transaction. They repeated that although alternative solutions – an interoperability
         agreement, an outsourcing agreement, or a margin offset agreement – can be envisaged
         in theory, they are unrealistic in practice and cannot therefore be expected to deliver
         equivalent efficiencies1042.
   (1221) Nevertheless, and in order to further demonstrate that the standard of paragraph 85 of
         the Horizontal Merger Guidelines is met, the Notifying Parties examined why neither
         the Single CCP scenario nor the Multi-CCP agreement is a realistic alternative to
         deliver efficiencies to "a similar extent" as the notified transaction.
   (1222) First, the Notifying Parties explained that a realistic Single CCP scenario involving
         NYX and DB would only concern LCHC SA and Eurex Clearing (not NYSE Liffe
         Clearing) and would in all likelihood not allow for cross-margining, in order to allow
         both NYX and DB to retain control on the financial integrity of their open interest pool.
         In this respect, the Notifying Parties point out that exchange operators typically have no
         incentive to conclude such agreements absent a merger scenario. Such agreements
         could jeopardize the integrity of their own open interest pools, which is essential to
         reduce financial risks and possible contagion, and may result in loss of business1043.
   (1223) Second, the Notifying Parties pointed out that a Multi-CCP agreement, if it allowed
         for cross-margining, would limit such opportunities to clearing members’ proprietary
         accounts and would not cover clearing members’ so-called "omnibus accounts" where
         the positions of clearing members’ customers are held, which would considerably
         diminish the scope of collateral savings.1044. By contrast, in a merger, which subjects
   1039
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 35.
   1040
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 36.
   1041
           Notifying Parties' response to the decision opening the proceedings – "Transaction related efficiencies",
           paragraph 37.
   1042
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO Efficiencies,, paragraph 32.
   1043
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies,, paragraph 45.
   1044
           The Notifying Parties explained in paragraph 45 of their response to the SO , Efficiencies, that the
           reason for such limited coverage is that CCPs typically do not have access to the breakdown of
EN                                                       274                                                         EN

         the common CCP to a single regulatory regime, the consolidation of clients’ positions
         in omnibus accounts could be realised directly by each clearing member. Even if two
         CCPs agreed to cover their clearing members’ omnibus accounts in a hypothetical
         agreement, they would be obliged to require additional collateral to cover the risk that
         the consolidated positions of a same clearing member would relate to different
         customers. This would considerably reduce (and potentially remove) the collateral
         savings resulting from the agreement1045.
   (1224) The Notifying Parties recalled that, most importantly, under either scenario,
         fragmented regulatory, customer protection and bankruptcy regimes in different
         Member States mean that CCPs would expose themselves and their customers to
         considerable legal uncertainty and risks. According to the Notifying Parties, it is these
         concerns that explain why there is currently no example of cross-margining agreements
         for derivatives in Europe, and why, in their view, such agreements cannot be considered
         as realistic alternatives to the notified transaction1046.
   (1225) Finally, the Notifying Parties concluded that although exchanges or CCPs frequently
         cooperate in the area of clearing, these agreements are hardly ever used to provide users
         with additional cross-margining opportunities. The Notifying Parties repeated that the
         Commission’s reference to potential alternative agreements that could deliver similar
         collateral savings as the notified transaction is therefore unrealistic and cannot be
         substantiated with a single example of a comparable derivative agreement in Europe.
                             12.3.2.2.2.2.      Commission's assessment
   (1226) In the SO, the Commission stated that it remained unclear that collateral savings, at
         least in part, could not be achieved through less restrictive means, for instance through
         a cross-margining agreement between CCPs or an access agreement to one single
         CCP1047. The Commission noted that whereas the Notifying Parties argue that cross-
         margining in derivatives could not be achieved (and has never been achieved) in Europe
         through interoperability or outsourcing agreements, such arrangements appear to exist
         either on different continents (in the US and Asia) or for other products (for instance
         cash equity in Europe) .
   (1227) As established in the Horizontal Merger Guidelines, "Efficiencies are relevant to the
         competitive assessment when they are a direct consequence of the notified merger and
         cannot be achieved to a similar extent by less anticompetitive alternatives". The same
         paragraph of the Horizontal Merger Guidelines clarifies that "The Commission only
         considers alternatives that are reasonably practical in the business situation faced by
           individual customer positions held in their clearing members’ omnibus accounts. Such omnibus
           positions are directly consolidated at the level of the clearing member and netted for purposes of margin
           requirements. As a result, even if two omnibus accounts held by two separate CCPs with the same
           clearing members have offsetting positions, such positions may in fact be ultimately held by different
           customers subject to different regimes and should not be cross-margined. Because of this uncertainty,
           CCPs refrain from (and have no incentive to) including omnibus accounts in international cross-
           margining agreements.
   1045
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, , paragraph 53.
   1046
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 43.
   1047
           See SO, paragraph 581.
EN                                                        275                                                        EN

         the merging parties having regard to established business practices in the industry
         concerned"1048.
   (1228) No other alternative possibilities were raised during the procedure by market players.
         The Commission therefore examines these three alternatives.
   (1229) Considering the information brought forward by the Notifying Parties and the market
         investigation, the Commission accepts that certain of these alternatives are not
         commonly used in the derivatives industry.
   (1230) Indeed, as regards interoperability, the constraints, risks and difficulties associated
         with its set up and operation appear to render it unlikely without comprehensive
         regulatory intervention.
   (1231) As regards the outsourcing agreements alternative, the Commission recognizes that
         these could only provide collateral benefits should they specifically allow for cross-
         margining between trades occurring on different trading venues. The Commission
         accepts that, in the industry concerned, such agreements are not generally observed and
         therefore cannot be considered as a reasonably practical alternative given the Notifying
         Parties' business situation having regard to established business practices.
   (1232) In the case of margin offset agreements, the Commission recognizes that there are
         some examples where this has been working in practice1049. Therefore the Commission
         considers such arrangements can be seen as established business practice in the industry
         concerned. However, it is unlikely that such agreements could deliver a similar level of
         efficiencies as the notified transaction, because such agreements would likely be
         restricted to clearing members’ proprietary portfolios,1050 and would therefore not
         represent the full proportion of the total open interest in each clearing-house.
   (1233) The Commission therefore considers that, having considered the additional
         information provided by the Notifying Parties, the latter have demonstrated that the
         collateral benefits could not be achieved to the same extent by less anti-competitive
         alternatives which are reasonably practical in the business situation they face having
   1048
          Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 85.
   1049
          At the Oral Hearing a past example of a limited arrangement was brought to the Commission's
          attention. NASDAQ OMX and LSE set up a structure based on a clearing co-operation agreement
          between LCH.Clearnet and NASDAQ OMX Stockholm under which members were provided the
          option of where to clear Nordic equity options and futures. This arrangement was terminated in 2008.
          The arrangement between NASDAQ OMX and LCH.Clearnet also included Oslo Clearing. Today,
          LCH.Clearnet and Oslo Clearing still have this arrangement in place for Nordic equity options and
          futures. See NASDAQ OMX's response to request for information dated 14 November 2011, question
          4, [...]*
   1050
          Limitation of such agreements to proprietary account was confirmed during a meeting with CME "CME
          has a one pot cross-margining agreement with OCC for equity products whereby eligible proprietary
          exposures are put in the combined portfolio where they are jointly margined", Agreed minutes of
          meeting with CME, 1 September 2011 (Non-confidential version) [...]* and a meeting with OCC "OCC
          and CME have a cross margining agreement in place involving a joint account (one-pot) which is used
          by clearing members (who are member of both OCC and CME Clearing) for proprietary and market
          professional business only. OCC and CME agreed on a defined list of what contracts can go into the
          joint account" Agreed minutes of a meeting with OCC, 1 September 2011, [...]*.
EN                                                     276                                                     EN

         regard to established business practices in the industry concerned1051. However, in view
         of the fact that there are certain agreements which allow for cross-margining, then it is
         likely that at least part of these efficiencies can be achieved in a less anti-competitive
         way than by the notified transaction.
   12.3.2.2.3.      Consumer benefits
   (1234) The Notifying Parties argue that the claimed collateral benefits accrue directly to
         users.
   (1235) In the SO, the Commission outlined that, even though the likely cost savings accrue
         on the customer side, the merged entity's incentive to leave efficiency gains from
         collateral savings with customers depends on the existence of competitive pressure
         from the remaining firms in the market and from potential entry1052. Given the fact that
         post-merger, no significant competitive pressure would exist in the relevant products in
         the derivatives trading and clearing markets concerned, such market power would have
         a price effect which would outweigh any claimed efficiency. The cost of posting
         collateral is only a fraction of the total cost of trading derivatives. The cost of posting
         collateral should not be considered in isolation, but rather the total price effect on
         consumers. The price effect resulting from the Notifying Parties' market power could
         take place through membership fees or transaction fees for derivatives trading and
         clearing.
   (1236) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties claim that the notion that such
         benefits can be clawed back is erroneous1053. The Notifying Parties argue that, in
         contrast with cost savings realised by the Notifying Parties, in order to benefit users,
         these efficiencies do not need to be "passed on" by the combined entity through price
         reductions, but they directly lower costs incurred by customers1054. The Notifying
         Parties claim that the Commission is conflating its competitive assessment with its
         efficiencies assessment1055.
   (1237) At the Oral Hearing, the Commission explained that the question of pass-on is
         relevant regardless of whether the benefit accrues on the producer or consumer side as
         is also known from the theory of tax incidence1056. The Commission also clarified at the
         Oral Hearing that it is not conflating its competitive assessment with its efficiencies
         assessment. As in standard merger analysis, the first step is to assess the merger's
         unilateral effects considering the coming together of the two firms without any changes
         in costs or technology. The second step assesses efficiencies and how the price adjusts
         following cost savings either on the firm or the customer side. This latter price effect is
   1051
           See Case T-342/07 Ryanair holdings v Commission, Judgment of 6 July 2010, paragraph 427 " The
           Commission only considers alternatives that are reasonably practical in the business situation faced by
           the parties to the concentration having regard to established business practices in the industry
           concerned".
   1052
           See SO, paragraph 582.
   1053
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 37.
   1054
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 142.
   1055
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 148.
   1056
           See footnote 1000 of this Decision.
EN                                                       277                                                       EN

         what is commonly called pass-on and is separate from any price effect considered under
         unilateral effects in the first step1057.
   (1238) The Notifying Parties further submit in their response to the SO that they would
         neither have the incentive, nor the ability to wholly claw back the user benefits. The
         Notifying Parties state that if efficiencies are only "partially" clawed back by price
         increases, customers will still be better off as a result of the merger1058.
   (1239) The Commission agrees that if efficiencies are only "partially" clawed back,
         consumers would indeed face a net benefit. However, this observation implies that only
         part of the quantified amount can be considered as a consumer benefit, not the full
         quantified amount.
   (1240) As an attachment to their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties submitted a paper
         by Compass Lexecon which provided further detail on the merged entity's ability and
         incentive to wholly claw back benefits1059. This paper presents four main arguments.
         First, the paper argues that efficiencies benefiting users of markets where no
         competitive issues have been found should be taken into account in the overall
         assessment of the notified transaction given that there is a significant overlap of
         customers in different markets. Second, the paper claims a proper analysis of the
         economics of user benefit capture (as opposed to the economics of cost-efficiency pass-
         through) suggests that a very significant portion of benefits will remain with users.
         Third, the paper argues that in order to capture customer benefits, price rises would
         need to be so large so as to be implausible. Finally, the paper argues that in order to
         fully capture user benefits, the combined entity would need to be able to price
         discriminate perfectly between customers which is extremely unlikely.
   (1241) The Commission notes that the verified collateral benefits relate directly to those
         markets where competitive issues have been found (equity and interest rate derivatives).
         Given the fact that the Notifying Parties can price discriminate at least in part1060, it
         appears likely that, only a portion of the collateral savings would remain with users.
   (1242) Therefore, the Commission considers that it is possible there will be some pass-on to
         (that is net benefits left with) customers, but the size of this effect cannot be determined
         on the basis of the available data.
                        12.3.2.3.CONCLUSION ON COLLATERAL SAVINGS
   (1243) As a result, and given that a range of respondents in the market investigation
         indicated that they expect some collateral savings, the Commission considers that it is
         likely that some efficiencies would accrue to customers from increased cross-margining
         opportunities which would therefore translate into collateral savings. However, the
         Commission also observes that some of these efficiencies, although not to a similar
         extent, could be achieved through less anti-competitive means. In addition, the
   1057
           Article 2(1) of the Merger Regulation requires the Commission to take into account, in its merger
           appraisal, the "economic and financial" power of the undertakings concerned in the concentration.
   1058
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, paragraph 153.
   1059
           Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the proposed transaction" of 24 October 2011.
   1060
           See the discussion in Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.4 of this Decision.
EN                                                       278                                                 EN

          Commission considers that it is possible that there will be some pass-on to (that is net
           benefits left with) customers although the size of this effect cannot be determined.
       12.3.3. Liquidity impact on integrated cash exchanges
                        12.3.3.1.THE NOTIFYING PARTIES' CLAIMS
   (1244) In the Form CO, the Notifying Parties argued that a major consequence of the
          notified transaction would be an increase of liquidity resulting in a reduction in the
          implicit costs of trading. The Notifying Parties claimed that the increase of liquidity
          would, for instance, come from the increase in the number of participants, improved
          distribution, and that increased product combinations and innovations will multiply
          trading opportunities. They further argued that reduced user access costs, as well as
          reduced implicit costs, will increase user profits, which will spur further participation.
          In the same way, reductions in collateral requirements will also free up funds for
          increased trading or other purposes. In a virtuous circle, these benefits increase the
          incentives for further participation, thereby further increasing liquidity.
   (1245) In their submission of 5 September 2011, the Notifying Parties reiterated that the
           notified transaction increases liquidity and reduces users' implicit costs of trading. The
           Notifying Parties presented several (theoretical) mechanisms through which stock
           exchange mergers may increase liquidity and decrease users’ implicit costs: (i) a merger
           between exchanges will increase liquidity if it helps intermediaries to defray the costs
           of access to the trading platform and of maintaining a continuous market presence.
           Standardised access to market data, indices and post-trading services also helps the
           liquidity of integrated cash markets. Harmonised trading functionality, rules and
           regulations also reduce the regulatory costs of trading in different markets; (ii) liquidity
           will increase if the merger reduces adverse-selection costs, due to the presence of
           informed traders. This will happen if the merger has a positive impact on trading
           activity and the additional order flow comes mainly from uninformed traders or elicits
           more aggressive competition between informed ones; (iii) a stock exchange merger may
           also increase liquidity (and lead to lower bid-ask spreads) if it reduces the inventory-
           holding costs of market makers. This is because the merger is likely to make the order
           flow more predictable and lowers the costs of rebalancing market-makers’ inventories
           after the execution of large orders; and (iv) liquidity may increase (and bid-ask spreads
           may fall) because the merger is likely to induce entry by market professionals operating
           elsewhere, as a result for instance of harmonised rules and admission criteria, and
           thereby lead to greater competitive pressure both in quote-setting and in brokerage fees.
   (1246) The Notifying Parties explained that the empirical literature on effects of exchange
           mergers is limited, but referred to Pagano and Padilla (2005b)1061 which found that the
           creation of Euronext led to a reduction in the bid-ask spreads of the large-cap securities
           traded in Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam, and Lisbon, and that the integration of those
           exchanges also led to an increase in traded volume and a reduction in volatility for
           those stocks. The Notifying Parties argued that, in principle, the liquidity impact of a
           stock exchange merger should be long lasting because the reduction in access costs,
           adverse selection costs, inventory costs and the increase in the strength of competition
   1061
             Pagano, M. and J. Padilla (2005b), “Efficiency gains from the integration of exchanges: lessons from
             the Euronext “natural experiment”, report prepared for Euronext.
EN                                                        279                                                     EN

         among intermediaries resulting from the merger would likely persist indefinitely. The
         Notifying Parties explained that Pagano and Padilla were not able to exploit this to test
         whether the liquidity effects they had identified were indeed the result of the merger,
         because they only had data until December 2004 – one year after the last integration
         event. However, the Notifying Parties submitted a new study based on an enlarged
         dataset to test the robustness of the findings in Pagano and Padilla.
   (1247) The Notifying Parties claim that their results confirm Pagano and Padilla’s
         conclusions and demonstrate that the impact on market liquidity that they identified is
         long lasting. The Notifying Parties estimate that the integration of the different
         exchanges led to a material reduction in the bid-ask spreads (approximately -50%) and
         historical volatility (-9%) of large-cap securities traded in Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam
         and Lisbon, and that it resulted in an increase in traded volume (approximately +25%).
         The Notifying Parties claim that these effects significantly reduce users’ implicit costs.
   (1248) The Notifying Parties' reports investigate the impact on bid-ask spreads, volatility
         and volume in Amsterdam, Paris, Belgium and Lisbon. For these purposes, the
         Notifying Parties employ multiple regression techniques in an attempt to capture the
         effect on liquidity resulting from the creation of Euronext.
   (1249) The Notifying Parties argue that the experience from the creation of Euronext
         suggests that the notified transaction will lead to similar benefits. In particular, they
         contend that the notified transaction will have a positive effect on trading activity and
         liquidity and will, therefore, reduce the implicit costs of trading. In their response to the
         SO, the Notifying Parties extrapolate the effect from the Euronext merger and attempt
         to quantify the expected liquidity gains from the notified transaction and claim that it
         will create cash efficiencies worth Euro […]* million.
                        12.3.3.2.ANALYSIS
   (1250) In the SO and during the Oral Hearing, the Commission expressed concerns about
         the identification of the impact of the creation of Euronext on liquidity in cash markets.
         The Commission questioned the robustness of the results and doubted whether the
         estimated effects from these particular historical mergers could be mapped onto the
         notified transaction. Indeed, the current competitive and market circumstances in the
         cash markets are substantially different to those existing when the mergers creating
         Euronext took place1062. The Notifying Parties confirmed the change in market
         circumstances throughout the procedure and in certain instances even used it as an
         argument to question the Commission's analysis1063. In their response to the SO and the
   1062
           For instance see the SO at paragraphs 590 and 594. Recital 590: "…It is not a priori clear that the
           estimated effects can be mapped onto the proposed transaction, as the competitive and market
           circumstances are substantially different (market concentration prior to proposed transaction,
           economies of scale, etc.). Moreover, the Notifying Parties have not attempted to argue to what extent
           the historical event study is representative for the currently proposed transaction (or why any
           differences would not matter)."
   1063
           See for instance the Notifying Parties' response to the SO, – Introduction, where the Notifying Parties
           outline significant changes that have occurred over the last years. While this mostly refers to the
           derivatives market, many of these changes, such as increased reliance in technology, globalisation or
           new entry among others are also applicable to the cash markets. As described below, the academic
           literature has also studied the market dynamics since the creation of Euronext.
EN                                                       280                                                       EN

         response to comments at the Oral Hearing, the Notifying Parties provided further
         robustness checks, but did not address the fundamental concerns on identification and
         the relevance of the historical data approach expressed in the SO.
   (1251) The analysis in this Section is solely based on data employed by the Notifying
         Parties in their analysis. The analysis confirms the concerns set out by the Commission
         in the SO1064 and responds to the claims made by the Notifying Parties in their
         submissions.
   12.3.3.2.1.     Verifiability
                            12.3.3.2.1.1.     Inference from historical data
   (1252) The Notifying Parties use the integration of the French, Belgian, Dutch and
         Portuguese stock exchanges between September 2000 and November 2003 as a "natural
         experiment" to predict the impact of the notified transaction.
   (1253) While inference from historical examples of efficiencies and consumer benefits is
         often informative for alleged efficiencies, the informative nature of historical data
         hinges on whether past events occur in conditions sufficiently similar to current market
         conditions. Where market conditions have changed substantially since the time of the
         historical event, such evidence cannot be of value to make any valid inference about the
         expected effects of a transaction today. In this respect, the Commission considers that
         competition and market circumstances in the cash markets have changed substantially
         since the early 2000s making inferences from past findings of little relevance for
         assessing the impact of current mergers.
   (1254) The Notifying Parties claim that they can eliminate this problem by introducing a
         number of explanatory variables to control for those circumstances1065. This claim is
         incorrect.
   (1255) To reliably identify the effect of the notified transaction under the current market
         circumstances, a succession of mergers ("natural experiments") that occur under
         different market circumstances would be required. Only such data would allow to
         identify how the likely merger effects vary with market conditions.
   (1256) Cash markets have undergone a large number of profound changes since the creation
         of Euronext, for instance: (i) the volumes traded by companies trading in overlapping
         exchanges have increased substantially (ii) there is an increase in the use of high
         frequency trading; (iii) with MiFID, MTFs successfully entered the market and started
         competing face to face with "traditional exchanges", which have led, among other
         things, to decreases in transaction costs; (iv) there have been episodes of entry prior to
         MiFID which have led to significant decreases in transaction fees even though the
         entrant reached insignificant trading volumes.
   1064
          In particular paragraphs 590, 593-594 and 598 of the SO.
   1065
          See for example page 7 of Compass Lexecon "The relevance of the Euronext integration to the
          transaction" 5 December 2011.
EN                                                    281                                             EN

   (1257) First, the Notifying Parties point out that the notified transaction could increase
         liquidity because of a "distribution effect", by which it is meant that companies trading
         in just one platform benefit from being able to distribute a broader range of securities in
         both platforms. However, the scope for such a distribution effect has shrunk
         substantially. At the time of the Euronext mergers, the total volume controlled by
         companies1066 trading in the different exchanges which then merged into Euronext was
         low compared to the volume generated by companies trading in both DB and NYSE
         today. In December 2000 and April 2001, 47% and 43% of the volumes respectively
         were generated by 22 entities trading in Amsterdam, Paris and Brussels. These entities
         represent 11% of all the companies with non-zero trades during those months. In April
         2010 and December 2010, the companies trading in both Euronext and DB controlled
         […]*% and […]*% of the volumes respectively1067. These entities account for […]*%
         and […]*% of the firms with non-zero trades in these months. Even if there may be
         some further scope for a distribution effect, it should be much smaller and cannot be
         estimated on the basis of the historical Euronext merger (as this would bias the
         result)1068.
   (1258) Second, High Frequency Trading ("HFT") started in Europe for cash trading in
         around 2005 and has grown in importance since then. The Notifying Parties point out
         that one industry participant outlines that: "HFTs in Europe rose from virtual non-
         existence in 2005 to representing an estimated 38% of equities trading volume by 2010.
         The numbers point to a dramatic rise of HFT activity post 2007...". 1069 The same
         market participant states that: "Recent sound academic research on HFT and its market
         impact has only been conducted for about four years. Much of it surrounds the impact
         on the “healthy” functioning of markets. Healthy markets are normally viewed as those
         which have low transaction costs and display high liquidity and high transparency. A
         widely held view is that HFT activity increases competition, hence lowering transaction
         costs. At the same time it is now common knowledge that fragmentation in Europe has
   1066
           For the purposes of this analysis, companies are aggregated according to the mother companies using
           data provided by the Notifying Parties in response to a request for information of 23 September 2011.
           Given that mother companies have control over the different subsidiaries trading at the different
           exchanges, it makes no sense to treat the different subsidiaries of for instance, JP Morgan, separately. It
           should be noted that these figures are a rough approximation and probably are a conservative estimation
           as all companies have not been able to be matched to the corresponding mother companies.
   1067
           In April 2010, there were […]* mother companies with overlapping volumes, while in December 2010
           there were .[…]*. These figures are based on data provided by the Notifying Parties in response to a
           request for information of 23 September 2011.
   1068
           In their submission "The relevance of the Euronext integration to the transaction" of 5 December 2011,
           the Notifying Parties claim that "Among the members of the Parties' exchanges, only around […]*%
           are members of both Parties' exchanges. Although these members account for a larger proportion of
           volume, it still means there are many members who operate on only one exchange." The Commission
           considers that the correct measure should take into account trading volume and not absolute number of
           members. The Notifying Parties moreover argue that non-overlapping members gaining access to the
           products of a second exchange post-merger are not the only source of benefit, but that the ability to
           trade on a single platform "using a common order book, using the same clearing house and using the
           same rule book" will also generate benefits. The Commission considers that there is a risk of double-
           counting by treating these as liquidity benefits as most of the mentioned cost efficiencies are being dealt
           with in separate submissions and calculations.
   1069
           Compass Lexecon "Response to comments at oral hearing" of 16 November 2011, page 5 where the
           Notifying Parties refer to a report by Dr. Christian Katz CEO, SIX Swiss Exchange & Member of the
           Group Executive Board, SIX Group. See http://www.world-exchanges.org/focus/2011-09/m-2-1.php,
           viewed on 25 January 2012.
EN                                                        282                                                          EN

         actually decreased transparency, however, this may not be the fault of HFT but rather
         the effect of de-regulation that was not well thought through. The focus of academic
         analysis has therefore been on the impact of HFT on liquidity. But there is the rub.
         Liquidity is not only defined as the speed of execution (latency) and the bid-offer spread
         of securities prices, but also by the depth (the available sizes at different and notably
         the most narrow, bid-offer spreads) and the resiliency of markets (how long does a
         market need to recover after a large order is executed). The latter is particularly
         important for large institutional investors. This is where academia is so far
         inconclusive. Research seems to indicate that HFTs indeed lower latency and spreads
         and probably also increase resiliency, but they might have a detrimental effect on
         market depth"1070 1071.
   (1259) Furthermore, HFT is believed to have solved some of the potential adverse selection
         problems of entry into trading.1072 HFT may solve a pre-existing adverse selection
         problem, and will then be accompanied by a rise in trade and a fall in bid-ask spreads.
         On the negative side, HFT can create or exacerbate a pre-existing adverse-selection
         problem in which case bid-ask spreads should rise and trade declines. In this respect,
         Jovanovic and Menkveld (2011) find that HFT actually led to a decrease in effective
         bid-ask spreads but did not affect the number of trades1073.
   (1260) The introduction of MiFID has increased fragmentation in cash markets. This
         regulation prompted the development of MTFs, such as Chi-X Europe, BATS and
   1070
          Dr. Christian Katz CEO, SIX Swiss Exchange & Member of the Group Executive Board, SIX Group.
          See http://www.world-exchanges.org/focus/2011-09/m-2-1.php, viewed on 25 January 2012.
   1071
          The SO stated in paragraph 592 that the choice of liquidity measure was not innocuous and suggested
          that the Notifying Parties also look at market depth. In their response to the SO the Notifying Parties
          stated that employing market depth "…would be an unnecessary use of resources given the liquidity
          measures used in the submitted analysis are widely accepted and suitable." Compass Lexecon
          "Efficiencies from the proposed transaction" of 24 October 2011,page 40. In the SO, for instance in
          paragraph 592, the Commission stated that recent academic literature looks at different measures of
          market liquidity. Market depth has been suggested by the recent literature as a superior liquidity
          measure as it reflects the risk that actual trades need to take place at substantially higher bid-ask spreads
          if there would be few and relatively small limit orders in the order book. See Degryse, H., de Jong, F.
          and van Kervel, V. (2011): "the Impact of dark trading and visible fragmentation on market quality",
          September 2011 draft (circulated previously under the title "Equity market fragmentation and liquidity:
          The impact of MiFID").
   1072
          Christian Katz CEO, SIX Swiss Exchange & Member of the Group Executive Board, SIX Group "It is
          easy to overlook that HFTs not only pose potential problems for existing market venues but also have
          actively created new venues. In Europe, similar to ECNs in the US markets, new MTFs were often co-
          founded by large HFT firms as has been the case for example with Chi-X Europe. HFT firms such as
          Citadel and Getco hereby generally act as seed investors and seed liquidity providers simultaneously.
          By providing consistent bid-offer spreads for securities listed on regulated markets, applying for
          instance techniques such as lit pegging, they make otherwise illiquid market venues come to life.
          Academically speaking they overcome “adverse selection” which might prevail in new venues because
          fundamental investors shun away from markets with supposedly large informational asymmetries.
          Practically speaking such HFT seeders are acting as market makers on new venues linked to securities
          listed in their home markets similarly as they do in exchange-listed derivatives linked to underlying
          cash markets. This quality of HFTs makes them a highly valuable additional set of market players in an
          environment such as Europe where de-regulation from 2007 was specifically introduced to create
          competition between market venues.", available at http://www.world-exchanges.org/focus/2011-09/m-2-
          1.php, viewed on 25 January 2012.
   1073
          Jovanovic, B. and Menkveld, J: Middlemen in Limit-Order Markets Manuscript, VU University
          Amsterdam, 2011.
EN                                                         283                                                          EN

         Turquoise, between 2007 and 2008 to become major market participants in cash
         markets. The proliferation in venues has increased competition, reducing bid-ask
         spreads and overall transaction costs1074. In this respect, it is worth noting that some of
         the interested third parties appeared dissatisfied with the "fragmentation" in the market
         over the last few years1075. Some of these third parties claimed that it was in their
         interest to have a stable platform that could provide confidence and reliable information
         to their investors and that could be undermined by such "fragmentation". What is
         termed "fragmentation" in this context is in fact the successful and beneficial notion of
         competition that MIFID has facilitated1076. Moreover, this competition and proliferation
         of additional venues has not only been beneficial in terms of fees, choice etc., but has in
         fact led to decreases in bid-ask spreads substantially and enlarged the volumes traded
         by investors1077. It should also be noted that the upcoming use of smart order routing
         technology (combining the information in different central limit order books into a
         single system) makes liquidity on different platforms available to customers on a single
         screen, reducing any negative impact of market fragmentation.
   (1261) Furthermore, there have been strong complementarities between HFT technology
         and MiFID. HFT technology has dramatically changed the nature of competition among
         venues. Participation externalities are quite high in human-intermediated exchanges as
         traders prefer to be where other traders are.1078 The introduction of technology in the
         different venues has prompted cuts in transaction fees and the development of new
         venues such as Chi-X Europe as "[p]articipation externalities are severely reduced
         when markets change from humans on floors to machines on electronic markets where
         search costs are significantly reduced".1079 In particular, Menkveld (2011) shows that
         the entry of HFT in both Chi-X Europe and Euronext coincided with a 50% drop in bid-
         ask spreads1080.
   (1262) The Notifying Parties further claim that the notified transaction would make access
         to both exchanges more cost-effective and convenient. As regards costs, it is observed
         that today, costs have already been dramatically reduced by competition as a result of
         MiFID. Comparing European equity trading platform fees for 2009 against 2006, the
         last full-year pre-MiFID, Oxera's analysis shows that trading customers have benefitted
         from significant declines in costs per transaction across almost all European financial
         centres. The aggregate reduction in trading platforms costs per transaction across all
   1074
           Menkveld, J. (2011): "High Frequency Trading and The New-Market Makers" EFA 2011 Paper, page 5.
   1075
           L'Oreal’s presentation at the Oral Hearing, 28 October 2011, afternoon session.
   1076
           A plea for less "fragmentation" in this regard is, in its full logical extension, a plea for one exchange
           venue (in the same way, this is the logical extension of the Notifying Parties' claim that all exchange
           consolidations lead to greater liquidity).
   1077
           For instance, bid-ask spreads for l'Oréal's share have nearly halved since the entry of MTFs (Chi-X
           Europe's presentation at the Oral Hearing, 28 October 2011, morning session). The important reduction
           in bid-ask spread and more generally in transaction costs following the entry of MTFs has been shown
           by Menkveld, J. (2011): "High Frequency Trading and The New-Market Makers" EFA 2011 Paper.
           Page 5 Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1722924, or Oxera report "Monitoring prices, costs
           and volumes of trading and post-trading services", May 2011 among many others.
   1078
           Pagano. M (1989): "Trading volume and asset liquidity" The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 104 (2),
           255-274.
   1079
           Menkveld, J. (2011): "High Frequency Trading and The New-Market Makers" EFA 2011 Paper, page 5
   1080
           Menkveld, J. (2011): "High Frequency Trading and The New-Market Makers" EFA 2011 Paper, page
           1.
EN                                                       284                                                         EN

         markets was 60%, with the UK showing the sharpest decrease (81%)1081 as shown in
         Figure 8.
         Figure 8: Decreasing costs of on-book equity trading in European markets since
         MiFID
         Source: Presentation prepared by LSE, 1 July 2011, EU Capital Markets – Obstacles to Turquoise
         Derivatives – Briefing for the European Commission, slide 22.
   (1263) The benefits of significant reductions in equity trading costs since the introduction of
         MiFID were mirrored in CCP clearing services. Oxera's analysis shows that, again
         comparing 2009 to 2006, the average reduction in costs per transaction of CCP clearing
         services for equities across all financial centres was 73%1082 as shown in Figure 9.
   1081
          Presentation prepared by LSE, 1 July 2011, EU Capital Markets – Obstacles to Turquoise Derivatives –
          Briefing for the European Commission, slide 22 [...]*.
   1082
          Presentation prepared by LSE, 1 July 2011, EU Capital Markets – Obstacles to Turquoise Derivatives –
          Briefing for the European Commission, slide 23 […]*.
EN                                                    285                                                      EN

         Figure 9: Decreasing costs of CCP clearing services in European markets since
         MiFID
         Source: Presentation prepared by LSE, 1 July 2011, EU Capital Markets – Obstacles to Turquoise
         Derivatives – Briefing for the European Commission, slide 23.
   (1264) The impact on costs from increased competition resulting from MiFID is such that, if
         there were to be any beneficial effect resulting from the notified transaction, the
         marginal effect of it is likely to be very small. All in all, and as shown by academic
         literature, these reductions in transaction costs have been associated with an increase in
         volumes and reductions in bid-ask spreads.
   (1265) Competitive conditions changed even before the introduction of MiFID. Already, in
         May 2004, LSE entered the market to compete with Euronext Amsterdam. LSE
         launched DTS on 24 May 2004 to offer electronic order book trading in the top 50
         Dutch equities, as an alternative to trading on Euronext Amsterdam. As reported by the
         UK Competition Commission in its evaluation of the proposed acquisition of LSE by
         DB or Euronext NV, trading fees were up to 50% lower than those offered by LSE for
         domestic trading.1083 In its analysis, the UK Competition Commission found that
         "Euronext’s econometric analysis of average trading fees between December 1999 and
         December 2004 suggests that Euronext Amsterdam’s fees reduced by approximately 30
         per cent as a direct result of DTS"1084. It is worth noting that the authors of that report
         are also the authors of the econometric reports submitted to the Commission in this
         procedure. Furthermore, the UK Competition Commission observed that despite its lack
         of success, "DTS appears to have generated a significant response from Euronext, at
   1083
           UK Competition Commission. Final report on Deutsche Börse AG, Euronext NV and London Stock
           Exchange plc- A report on the proposed acquisition of London Stock Exchange plc by Deutsche Börse
           AG      or    Euronext      NV.     Recitals    5.40    to  5.45.    See      http://www.competition-
           commission.org.uk/rep_pub/reports/2005/504lse.htm, viewed on 25 January 2012.
   1084
           UK Competition Commission. Final report on Deutsche Börse AG, Euronext NV and London Stock
           Exchange plc- A report on the proposed acquisition of London Stock Exchange plc by Deutsche Börse
           AG or Euronext NV, Recital 5.42 where the Competition Commission makes reference to LECG
           Efficiency gains from the integration of exchanges: CC econometric questions. 8 June 2005.
EN                                                       286                                                     EN

         least in the short term. Between January 2004 and May 2004, Euronext introduced
         three separate price changes:
          (a) harmonization of Euronext tariffs across its various exchanges, which in the
          Netherlands resulted in lower prices for larger trading firms and higher prices for
          smaller ones;
          (b) a further lowering of all fees by 10 to 25 per cent from April 2004. Passive orders
          were discounted by 50 per cent, and trading firms only charged for passive orders up
          to their first 60000 trades. The latter changes appear to have been specifically
          directed at keeping liquidity on Euronext; and
          (c) a temporary reduction in price from May until July 2004. This further reduced
          marginal fees (by 10 to 40 per cent over the second change, depending on volume).
          On 1 February 2005 Euronext introduced a revised harmonized tariff."1085
   (1266) Contrary to what is claimed by the Notifying Parties,1086 the academic literature has
         also shown that this entry is far from having a negligible effect. In fact, Euronext did
         cut its fees by 50% on 23 April 2004. In this respect, Foucault and Menkveld (2008)
         examined this entry event and found results consistent with those reported by the UK
         Competition Commission.1087 In particular, Foucault and Menkveld (2008) found that
         intermarket competition improves consolidated depth, as it intensifies competition
         among liquidity providers and forces market organizers to cut their fees. However,
         Foucault and Menkveld (2008) also find that in their model, intermarket competition
         hurts customers not using smart order routing systems when it leads to a decline in the
         incumbent market cumulative depth and it reduces a liquidity provider's total expected
         profits.
   (1267) Finally, the factors mentioned above in Recitals (1257) to (1266) are only a limited
         set of circumstances that have changed over the last ten years and which had an effect
         on liquidity. There appear to be other relevant factors which have changed over time.
         For instance, it cannot be excluded that there are secular trends in willingness to trade
         equity that have increased expected volume (relative to volume in Frankfurt or London)
         and thus reduce bid-ask spreads. In particular, investment behaviour has shifted into
         equities. Figure 10 shows that there has been a general increase in asset holdings over
         the period 2002 – 2007, and more importantly, that there has been a shift towards
         equity. The change in allocation towards equity took place to a different degree in
         different countries. Figure 11 shows that the asset allocation of institutional investors
         differs markedly by country. First, there is a different qualitative trend between the UK
         and continental Europe. Secondly, there is a difference for France (traditionally more
         banking oriented) relative to Germany. Therefore, there is a potential issue that there
   1085
          UK Competition Commission. Final report on Deutsche Börse AG, Euronext NV and London Stock
          Exchange plc- A report on the proposed acquisition of London Stock Exchange plc by Deutsche Börse
          AG or Euronext NV, Recital 5.45.
   1086
          Compass Lexecon "Response to comments at oral hearing" of 16 November 2011, page 14.
   1087
          Foucault, T. and Menkveld, A. (2008): "Competition for order flow and smart order routing systems",
          Journal of Finance, 63, 1, 119-158.
EN                                                  287                                                       EN

        are specific trends in investment behaviour which have an impact on liquidity and
        which differ across countries. These would be omitted.
        Figure 10: Asset allocation of Institutional Investors (in trillion of US dollars)1088
        Source: Presentation prepared by LSE, 1 July 2011, EU Capital Markets – Obstacles to Turquoise
        Derivatives – Briefing for the European Commission, slide 24.
        Figure 11: Global Asset Allocation of Institutional Investors by Selected
   Country1089
   1088
         Global Financial Stability Report, International Monetary Fund (IMF), September 2011, Chapter 2:
         Long-term investors and their asset allocation: where are they now?, figure 2.1, Data based on assets
         under management by institutional investors in 17 OECD countries.
         See http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/gfsr/2011/02/pdf/ch2.pdf, viewed on January 2012.
   1089
         Global Financial Stability Report, International Monetary Fund (IMF), September 2011, Chapter 2:
         Long-term investors and their asset allocation: where are they now?, figure 2.4.
         See http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/gfsr/2011/02/pdf/ch2.pdf, viewed on January 2012.
EN                                                     288                                                     EN

   (1268) Therefore, the Commission considers that, given the multitude of changes which
         have taken place over the last ten years, it is impossible to impute any efficiency gain
         from a 2002 merger into a transaction that to be completed in 2012.
                          12.3.3.2.1.2.   Identification of the impact of the mergers at the time
   (1269) Even if the use of historical data were appropriate in this case, the analysis submitted
         by the Notifying Parties would still fail to identify the impact of the mergers at the time.
         The Commission observes that the impact identified from the Euronext merger may be
         capturing an increasing trend in liquidity already existing pre-merger which is not
         adequately controlled for. The Commission notes that the estimation of the merger
         effect cannot be identified if it simply approximates the impact of an underlying time
         trend in the data, after having introduced a number of control variables. This
         identification problem has been spelled out in the Section dealing with efficiencies in
         the SO. For instance, the SO stated in paragraph 593 that the "Although the Notifying
         Parties run multiple regressions and introduce control variables, the actual
         econometric analysis may yield biased results if the explanatory variables are mis-
         specified or if important explanatory variables are omitted." The SO further pointed out
         in paragraph 598 that "[t]he Notifying Parties rely on an event study methodology,
         whereby exchange mergers enter as simple before/after dummy variables. Such an
         approach neglects the underlying trends in transaction volumes that are being
         processed on different platforms. The recent literature relies on more sophisticated
         methodologies that allow for more time-variation in exchange market fragmentation
         and concentration. Indeed, daily traded volumes in the exchanges studied and
         competing trading venues (some of which have not been included in the Parties'
         approach such as dark pools) evolved dynamically over time, which is not captured by
         a simple before/after dummy variable. Therefore, the results submitted by the Parties
         may be biased."
EN                                                 289                                                EN

   (1270) First, there is a clear trend in the raw data averaged across securities1090. The graph in
         Figure 12 below replicates the graph presented by the Notifying Parties for the
         Amsterdam exchange in their response to comments at the Oral Hearing, applied also to
         the other three exchanges. The graphs in Figures 12 and 13 show the average monthly
         bid-ask spreads for the period 1997 to 2010 without controlling for any explanatory
         variables1091. In addition to the graph the Notifying Parties provided for the Amsterdam
         exchange, additional graphs have been included for the other exchanges using the data
         supplied by the Notifying Parties, including data for the period 1997-20001092. The
         different merger events are marked by three vertical lines.
   (1271) In Figure 12, three elements are particularly noteworthy: (i) there is a decreasing
         trend in average bid-ask spreads1093 occurring before any of the three mergers takes
         place; (ii) systematically there is a spike at the time of the merger after which there is a
         swift return to trend; and (iii) a clear effect of the financial crisis starting from March
         2007 is observed which is associated with an upward deviation from the trend in
         average bid-ask spreads.
   (1272) There may be good reasons that would explain the decreasing trend in average bid-
         ask spreads pre-2002. For instance, the Paris Bourse introduced a new electronic
         trading technology, the Nouveau Système de Cotation1094 as an upgrade of the CAC
         system (Cotation Assistée en Continu - CAC) in 1995. In Amsterdam, following the
         merger of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange Association and the European Options
         Exchange, the new company Amsterdam Exchanges compiled the AEX index of Dutch
         blue-chip companies and adopted a one-stop shopping model, which included clearing
         and settlement services, a central securities depository and data services, to provide
         investors with a constant flow of high-level information1095. In addition, just before the
         Euronext mergers, in January 1999, stocks on all stock exchanges in the eurozone
         started to be quoted in euro.
   (1273) The decreasing pre- and post-merger trend in bid-ask spread is particularly noticeable
         in the case of the CAC 40. It is noteworthy that when the merger between Brussels and
         Paris occurred (the first dotted line) and with the beginning of the crisis (end of 2007),
         an upward deviation from the trend is observed. Likewise in the case of BEL 20, spikes
         in the trend are observed just after the merger with Paris or even after the merger with
         Lisbon. By March 2007, the effect of the financial crisis can clearly be identified where
         upward deviation from the trend is observed. A very similar pattern is also observed in
         the case of AEX. It is noteworthy that the Notifying Parties describe the pre-2002
         evolution of the spreads as "broadly flat" while the post-merger period as one
   1090
           For these purposes, and in line with what the Notifying Parties report, the estimated fixed effects of a
           model that only includes time dummies for each month but no other explanatory variables are
           considered.
   1091
           Below and in the Annex the regressions introducing quarterly effects interacted with each of the
           exchanges are presented.
   1092
           Compass Lexecon, Response to comments at oral hearing,16 November 2011. The 1997-1999 data
           were provided by the Notifying Parties' consultants in an email sent on 21 November 2011.
   1093
           The analysis conducted by the Notifying Parties actually employs the log of the normalised bid-ask
           spread, but for ease of exposition, hereafter, it is referred to as the bid-ask spread.
   1094
           See http://www.comprendrelabourse.com/Initiation/init_6.htm, viewed on 25 January 2012.
   1095
           NYSE Euronext website, see http://corporate.nyx.com/who-we-are/history/amsterdam, viewed on 25
           January 2012.
EN                                                         290                                                      EN

        characterised by a "downward trend"1096. This distinction is clearly at odds with the
        graphs below in Figure 121097.
        Figure 12: Monthly fixed effects – France, Belgium and the Netherlands
             [                                                                                ]*
            [                                                                                  ]*
   1096
         Compass Lexecon Memorandum "Response to the Chief Economist's Team's econometric analysis" of
         13 December 2011, page 9.
   1097
         The vertical lines in Figure 12 indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and
         Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels
         exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon
         exchange.
EN                                                  291                                                       EN

           [                                                                                              ]*
   (1274) In the case of the PSI, there is substantial volatility in average spreads across the
         sample period. It is observed that already prior to the mergers, bid-ask spreads have
         dropped substantially, while shortly after the first merger, a spike is observed. After the
         merger with Lisbon, there seems to be a downward trend in spreads which is reversed
         upwards as of the summer of 2007, and reversed downwards again following the
         Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in 2008 as can be seen in Figure 131098. As an overall
         result, the average spreads are in a similar range before the first and after the third
         merger.
   1098
          The vertical lines in Figure 13 indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and
          Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels
          exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon
          exchange.
EN                                                   292                                                       EN

   Figure 13: Monthly fixed effects - Portugal
      [                                                                                        ]*
   (1275) Since there are numerous underlying factors which potentially influence bid-ask
         spreads, the Notifying Parties have introduced explanatory variables to control for some
         of the other factors driving the size of bid-ask spreads. However, the Notifying Parties
         do not include any time effects in their analysis other than seasonal controls for the
         twelve months of the year, and the actual merger events that they include in their
         specification. Merger events are dummy variables which take a value of one after the
         merger for all securities affected by the merger. The merger effect claimed by the
         Notifying Parties is picked up by the coefficients associated with these dummy
         variables. If, after including the explanatory variables that the Notifying Parties use for
         their regressions, a secular trend in the data would still be observed, the merger effect in
         their estimation would be biased and pick up part of the residual trend in the data. The
         concern is that the merger dummies pick up that trend in the data. They would therefore
         wrongly attribute the trend in the data to a merger effect. Given the many changes in the
         industry not controlled for in the specification, this amounts to a serious identification
         problem.
   (1276) In order to test whether this problem is potentially present, the model specification
         has been broadened and a regression with the same explanatory variables as the
         Notifying Parties has been run replacing the merger effect with time fixed effects. The
         Notifying Parties' specification is therefore run, but now includes quarterly dummies
         interacted with the exchange-specific effects. This is a generalisation of the Notifying
         Parties' specification which enables the specific effect on bid-ask spread attributed to
         each quarter and to each exchange to be captured. The coefficients associated with each
         quarter and exchange are then plotted in the graphs presented below in Figure 14.
EN                                                 293                                                EN

         Importantly, a strong decreasing trend over time is observed which is difficult to
         explain as arising from the merger.1099 Indeed, the trend already exists prior to the
         Euronext merger, indicating that other factors that occurred prior to the merger were
         already driving bid-ask spreads down. Similar to the raw data, these estimates preserve
         the property that during the merger, there is an upward deviation from the trend to later
         return to the trend. This is true for all locations except for Lisbon where there is no
         trend and no perceptible change after the merger1100.
         Figure 14: Quarter-year-index coefficients on normalised bid-ask spread
         [                                                                                                   ]*
   (1277) If the dataset is limited to 31 December 2006 in order to exclude the impact from
         MTF after MiFID, the same upward deviation is observed as can be seen in Figure 15.
   1099
           The regression specification is provided in the Annex. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included
           in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF
           volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it
           includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the
           period. The dependent variable is the log of normalised bid-ask spread.
   1100
           See the Annex for the analysis based on other liquidity measures than bid-ask spreads. The Notifying
           Parties have put forward an array of liquidity measures to sustain their claim that the creation of
           Euronext led to an increase in liquidity. Subsequently they argue that such improvement in liquidity
           would equally result from this notified transaction. The identification problems described for the
           analysis of bid-ask spreads presented in Section 12.3.3 of the Decision similarly occur for these
           additional set of liquidity measures. In any case, it is not clear how the alleged effects on volatility,
           turnover, the value of traded volume and volume would translate into efficiency gains. As explained in
           Recital (1142), the burden of proof to verify the efficiencies is on the Notifying Parties. They do not
           clarify in which way the alternative liquidity measures can be mapped into efficiency gains.
EN                                                        294                                                        EN

   Figure 15: Quarter-year-index coefficients on normalised bid-ask spread on a reduced
   sample (01/01/2000-31/12/2006)
   [                                                                                                        ]*
   (1278) These results are also robust if the regressions are run separately for each city1101.
   (1279) If the estimations from the Notifying Parties were picking up a merger effect, the
         estimation should pick up a level effect that would look like a step effect. This is not
         what is observed. Instead, a decreasing trend which appears to be picked up by the
         merger dummies employed by the Notifying Parties to control for the Euronext merger
         is observed.
   (1280) The Notifying Parties have argued that the Commission's time fixed effects model is
         a flawed specification1102. They have claimed (i) that this model includes variables that
         should not have been part of the model; (ii) that the specification prevents the control
         variables from capturing trends present in the actual data in a theoretically consistent
         way; (iii) that the model pools data from all exchanges into a single regression and
   1101
           The Notifying Parties claim (Compass Lexecon Memorandum "Response to the Chief Economist's
           Team's econometric analysis" of 13 December 2011) that the city-specific regressions show a different
           picture. The Commission has not been able to replicate Compass Lexecon's results (their Figure 3) as
           the Notifying Parties have not submitted the underlying code along with their report as is clearly
           established in the Best practices for the submission of economic evidence. The graph above, however,
           uses the Commission's correct specification and, hence, shows that the results are robust. The details of
           the regressions used are reported in the Annex.
   1102
           Compass Lexecon Memorandum "Response to the Chief Economist's Team's econometric analysis" of
           13 December 2011.
EN                                                       295                                                         EN

         forces all control variables other than the quarter-year time fixed effects to have the
         same effect across all exchanges, and that this restriction causes the model to produce
         the trends presented by the Commission; and (iv) that the trend presented is forced into
         the model artificially and that there is no omitted trend once the control variables
         suggested by the Notifying Parties are used.
   (1281) The assessment of these claims is as follows. First, the Commission's time fixed
         effects model generates a pre-merger period downward sloping trend both when the
         regressions are run on a pooled dataset and when they are run separately for each
         exchange. This establishes that the results are not driven by the pooling. Second, even if
         the included time effects model would be misspecified1103, it can be shown that the
         control variables used by the Notifying Parties' are clearly unable to pick up the
         underlying downward tendencies, especially for the pre-2002 period. The residuals of a
         regression model show the part of the model's explained variable (in this case: the
         logarithm of bid-ask spreads) that is not explained by the model's explanatory (control)
         variables. The residuals of a regression model which as control variables has only the
         variables used by the Notifying Parties (and excluding the step variables representing
         the different mergers) show that these control variables are not able to control for the
         underlying trends in the data. That is, even after controlling for the effect of these
         variables, there is still a pre-2002 downward trend in the bid-ask spreads as can be seen
         in Figure 16. This implies that part of the drop in the spreads is attributable to non-
         merger specific causes. In other words, these results confirm that there exists an
         identification problem with the Notifying Parties' modelling1104.
   1103
          Model misspecification is argued by the Notifying Parties in Compass Lexecon report "Response to
          Chief Economist's Team's econometric analysis", 13 December 2011. In particular, the Notifying
          Parties argue in section 3 on page 5 that "When assessing econometric estimations it is important to
          check whether estimation results are consistent with economic theory and common-sense. Where they
          are not, it suggests that the model is not correctly specified… the CET's model fails to generate
          coefficient on the control variables which are consistent with economic theory and logic". The
          Commission notes that the model specifications put forward by the Notifying Parties equally suffer
          from counter-intuitive signs on selected control variables. The fact that Notifying Parties leave out the
          "tick change dummy" control variable that enters the CET's specification with the correct sign but
          which enters their specification with the wrong sign biases and invalidates the comparison of both
          specifications in Table 3. The Commission notes that the "tick change dummy" variable enters with the
          counterintuitive sign already in the 16 November 2011 Compass Lexecon submission "Response to
          comments at oral hearing" (Table 2, Table 4, Table 5, etc.). The Commission also observes that the tick
          change dummy even appears when the sample is capped in December 2006 (Tables 4 and 5 of the
          Compass Lexecon report "Response to Chief Economist's Team's econometric analysis", 13 December
          2011), which is nonsensical given that the tick change was only performed in 2007 (see page 8 of
          Compass Lexecon "Revising the liquidity effects of the creation of Euronext's integrated cash market",
          5 September 2011). To the extent that the Notifying Parties claim CET model misspecification on the
          basis of control variables that enter with a counterintuitive sign, it would equally apply to their own
          model and hence their results.
   1104
          The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility,
          volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange, the last price of the security, market capitalisation, month-
          and security fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the four exchanges. The black lines
          (that is, the added non-vertical lines) are trends fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for
          the different merger periods, and also for a different slope after 2007. The first trend slopes, for the
          period before the Paris-Brussels integration, are always statistically significantly different from zero.
          The results also hold when the GDP variable is also included in the list of control variables. The details
          of the regressions are reported in the Annex.
EN                                                        296                                                          EN

        Figure 16: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification by
        stock exchange
        [                                                                                   ]*
   (1282) Even if it were possible to disentangle the trend existing prior to the merger from the
         actual effect of the merger, it would be expected that the effect of the merger should be
         limited to a certain time window, otherwise the merger dummies would be picking up
         many other unobservable effects which have increased liquidity over time. In particular,
         there are changes from 2005 onwards (for instance, increased use of high frequency
         trading) for which the data do not exist to identify them. This biases upward the
         magnitude of estimated merger efficiencies.
   (1283) In addition, the specification presented by the Notifying Parties includes a non-
         exhaustive list of events which occurred between 2000 and 2010. These events are
         included in their specification as single-day events. In their subsequent submissions, the
         Notifying Parties specify these events to control for 5 days before and after the event.
         However, events such as the terrorist attack in New York and Washington on 11
         September 2011 or Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy on 15 September 2008 among many
         others have had a longer lasting effect. For instance, following some comments from
         the Commission at the Oral Hearing, the Notifying Parties introduced a permanent
         effect to control for the introduction of a new regulation in France back on 3 May 2001
         and the entry of DTS between May 2004 and September 2005. As a result, it is
         observed that by introducing a permanent or longer lasting effect, the estimated impact
         of the merger significantly decreases. It cannot be excluded that other unobserved
         events may have had persistent effects, especially since the list of events employed by
         the Notifying Parties is limited.
EN                                                297                                               EN

   (1284) The identification problem also exists if the omitted factors cause not trends but
         rather permanent changes in the level of spreads. As indicated, these events can be, for
         example, the introduction of HFT or entry.
   (1285) It should also be noted that the MiFID volume variable used by the Notifying Parties
         in their regressions does not include the volume generated by all related MTFs (trading
         volume of Turquoise is not included). This implies that the magnitude of drop in
         spreads due to the effect of MiFID is underestimated. The unexplained effect shows up
         in the estimated merger effects and, hence, contributes to the identification problem.
         Furthermore, it is known that there have been entrants obtaining low volume but having
         a large impact on fees, which feeds through to bid-ask spreads. This would lead to
         further bias.
   (1286) As already described in the SO, the Notifying Parties' analysis therefore suffers from
         a severe identification problem1105. As spelled out in the SO in paragraphs 595-603,
         there are problems of omitted variables, variable misspecifications and concerns with
         the methodological choices which make it impossible to disentangle the effect of the
         Euronext merger on liquidity from other trends or events in the market.
                            12.3.3.2.1.3.      Criticism on the calculation of Euro […]* million
   (1287) Even if the nature of the efficiency claim were to be acknowledged, quod non, there
         is still a significant issue in the way in which the parameters have been employed to
         quantify any effect. The Notifying Parties estimate the total monetary savings derived
         from the reduction of the bid-ask spread stemming from the notified transaction at Euro
         […]* million. This estimate is the result of applying a weighted average reduction in
         bid-ask spreads across all phases of the Euronext mergers to the EUR average bid-ask
         spreads of different selected securities in 2010 and multiplying the latter by the 2010
         trading volumes1106 of the securities traded in the Notifying Parties' exchanges. The
         Notifying Parties have failed to demonstrate that the estimates are conservative, and
         that the robustness checks carried out for the underlying regression model do not lead to
         substantially lower figures,
   (1288) It is not clear which regression specification the Notifying Parties have retained as
         the basis for their estimation. Moreover, given the wide range of model specifications,
         any choice seems to be discretionary to a certain extent, which may not be innocuous as
         different model regressions lead to substantially different integration impact
         coefficients and hence savings estimates. Furthermore, the uncertainty about the
         estimates varies significantly and the confidence interval is not taken into account when
         generating efficiency estimates.
   (1289) The Notifying Parties claim that the weighted average reduction in bid-ask spreads
         amounts to […]*% following the Euronext mergers, leading to a total monetary
   1105
           See the SO for instance in paragraphs 590, 593-594 and 598.
   1106
           The Notifying Parties exclude volumes generated by market makers because the former can adjust the
           level of bid-ask spread according to the level of liquidity. Therefore, they are indifferent between high
           and low liquidity.
EN                                                      298                                                          EN

         proposed saving of Euro […]* million if applied to the 2010 volumes1107. The latter is
         the result of entering the different integration phase regression point estimates
         corresponding to one specific regression specification1108 into a spreadsheet. There are
         significant doubts about the correctness of this claim. From the underlying spreadsheet
         and technical annex, it appears as if the Notifying Parties have applied a weighted
         average bid-ask spread reduction of […]*% in order to come to a Euro […]* million
         estimate of total savings, in contrast to what is being claimed1109. A bid-ask spread
         reduction of […]*% would have resulted in a total projected monetary saving of Euro
         […]* million, rather than Euro […]* million1110.
   (1290) Moreover, it is not clear where the claimed […]*% cost reduction and corresponding
         confusion comes from. When plugging in the regression point estimates of regression
         model 6 in table 41111 of the Notifying Parties spreadsheet, the Commission indeed ends
         up with a weighted average reduction in bid-ask spreads of […]*%, so the Notifying
         Parties may have switched from specification 6 to specification 5 without updating the
         main text and findings accordingly1112.
   (1291) The choice of model 5 over model 6 is questionable, given that only the latter
         controls for GDP per capita.1113 It could be that the Notifying Parties felt uneasy about
         relying on point estimates that are not statistically significant, as the phase 2 point
         estimate is not statistically different from zero for a typical confidence level. However,
         the phase 2 point estimate is also not statistically different from zero at the 95%
         confidence level for model 5. When only statistically significant estimates are retained,
         the resulting savings estimate can differ dramatically and may be as low as Euro […]*
         million1114.
   (1292) Furthermore, the extrapolation is unrealistic. As described in Recital (1276) above,
         the coefficients employed by the Notifying Parties to compute the liquidity savings
   1107
          Padilla and Coppi (2011), "Efficiencies from the proposed Transaction", 24 October 2011, amongst
          others Table 1 on page 55, first paragraph of page 54 and last paragraph of page 55.
   1108
          It appears as if the regression coefficients from model specification 5 in Table 4 of Padilla and Coppi
          "Revisiting the liquidity effects of the creation of Euronext's integrated cash market" of 5 September
          2011 have been retained. This model specification leaves out important control variables such as GDP
          per capita, market capitalisation, price of the security, etc.
   1109
          Padilla and Coppi (2011), "Efficiencies from the proposed Transaction", attachement B, 24 October
          2011. This file was only sent to the Commission on 17 November 2011.
   1110
          The estimates in Table 1 of Padilla and Coppi (2011), "Efficiencies from the proposed Transaction" of
          24 October 2011, do not correspond to a […]*% weighted average bid-ask spread reduction (despite the
          claim in the title), but rather to a […]*% reduction. A […]*% reduction would be the result if the
          regression coefficients of specification 6 of Table 4 were to be used.
   1111
          Padilla and Coppi "Revisiting the liquidity effects of the creation of Euronext's integrated cash market"
          of 5 September 2011.
   1112
          This confusion is even more unfortunate given that the alleged […]*% reduction in bid-ask spreads
          (which turns out to be […]*%) is being used as an input when estimating the savings from derivatives
          trading.
   1113
          Neither of both models control for other relevant control variables such as security price and market
          capitalisation. When the latter control variables are added, point estimates change dramatically once
          again. See for example Tables 1 and 2 of Compass Lexecon Memorandum "Response to comments at
          oral hearing" of 16 November 2011.
   1114
          This would be the result if only the statistically different coefficients of model 5 in Table 1 were
          retained from the Compass Lexecon Memorandum "Response to comments at oral hearing", 16
          November 2011.
EN                                                        299                                                       EN

         capture the decrease in bid-ask spread resulting from factors which occur all over the
         period. Instead, it seems appropriate to limit any potential effect on bid-ask spreads to a
         specific time window after the merger. In light of the specification run by the
         Commission on the basis of the Notifying Parties' data and plotted in the graphs, it is
         observed that these coefficients are significantly lower and may even be close to zero in
         the case of Lisbon in the period closest to the merger. Also, the estimates for
         Amsterdam are much smaller with a tighter time window. This is reflected by the fact
         that, for example, when estimating their models on a more limited sample (2000-2005),
         the Notifying Parties find that the effects of the first and third mergers drop
         dramatically and in some cases lose statistical significance1115. It is important to note
         that the Notifying Parties have failed to provide the estimated total savings implied by
         these alternative models.
   (1293) Finally, the claimed effects of the Euronext mergers are very heterogeneous.
         Euronext brought together first the Brussels and Paris exchanges, then the Amsterdam
         exchange and finally the Lisbon exchange. It is known from Nielsson (2009) that
         potential effects on liquidity stemming from the Euronext merger are heterogeneous
         among different securities types. Nielsson's analysis evaluates the liquidity impact on
         all stocks and not just the large caps, as performed by the Notifying Parties. Nielsson
         concludes that the small and medium firms did not enjoy any increased liquidity effect
         from the Euronext merger. Furthermore, there is a very different effect across securities.
         Again, Nielsson (2009) finds that the Euronext merger had no liquidity effect on the
         Dutch securities. Nielsson argues that this lack of effect on liquidity is due to the strong
         foreign ownership of Dutch equities (67% of Dutch stocks were controlled by foreign
         investors)1116. With so much heterogeneity, it is unclear whether it should be concluded
         that the notified transaction has an effect more like the effect in Amsterdam or the
         effect in Paris at the time.
                            12.3.3.2.1.4.      Results from the market investigation
   (1294) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties argue that 76% of responsive
         market participants expect increased liquidity from the notified transaction1117. To
         arrive at this figure, the Notifying Parties base themselves on 37 responses for which
         they provide the reference in footnote 52 of their paper "Response to statement of
         objections - transaction-related efficiencies".
   (1295) Only six of the 37 responses relate to expectations of increased liquidity in cash
         markets, including four responses to questionnaire 1 which was sent to 269 direct
         exchange customers (116 customers responded) and two responses to questionnaire 2,
         which was sent to 131 indirect exchange customers (39 customers responded)1118.
   1115
           Compass Lexecon Memorandum "Response to comments at oral hearing" of 16 November 2011,
           Annex A, Table 16.
   1116
           Nielsson, U. (2009): “Stock Exchange Merger and Liquidity: The Case of Euronext”, Journal of
           Financial Markets, vol. 12, issue 2, May. Figures extracted from FESE (2002): "Share ownership
           structure in Europe".
   1117
           Notifying Parties' response to the SO, Efficiencies, , pages 14-17.
   1118
           Response of Banco BPI, Metzler Investment, WGZ-Bank AG Westdeutsche Genossenschafts-
           Zentralbank, Landesbank Hessen-Thüringen (responses to Question 167 of Questionnaire Q1, – [...]*.
EN                                                       300                                                  EN

   (1296) Among the six respondents, one respondent, Alpha Strategien Triple MH SEB
         Master Kapitalanlagegesellschaft, assumes more liquidity but explicitly stated in its
         overall response to the questionnaire that it is not active in equity trading. Another
         respondent states that the merger may potentially lead to higher liquidity (that is to say
         the respondent is not certain). Therefore, when the figure of 76% is put into context, it
         appears that a total of four respondents have made a clear reference to an expectation of
         increased liquidity in cash equity markets.
   (1297) The Commission therefore considers that the Notifying Parties have significantly
         overstated the expectations voiced in the market investigation. Less than a handful of
         respondents made reference to expectations of increased liquidity in the cash markets.
         In this respect, it is worth noticing that as described above in Recital (1260) interested
         third party interventions in favour of the notified transaction as a means to provide a
         stable environment for investors to trade stocks are unsubstantiated and have failed to
         observe that "fragmentation" of cash markets and technological developments have in
         fact increased liquidity by significantly reducing bid-ask spreads over the last years.
         Technological development has made it possible to access reliable information and
         benefit from trading simultaneously in different exchanges. This fact has been endorsed
         by the academic literature which has shown that the market fragmentation enabled
         through MiFID and technological development have been drivers in increased market
         liquidity1119.
   (1298) Therefore, the Commission considers that the claimed liquidity benefits for cash
         markets are not verifiable.
   12.3.3.2.2.      Merger specificity
   (1299) It cannot reasonably be inferred from the submitted evidence that the cash liquidity
         benefits would materialise if the merger were to be completed. Therefore, the
         Commission considers it is not necessary to examine whether these efficiencies could
         have been realised absent the notified transaction.
   12.3.3.2.3.      Consumer benefits
   (1300) The Notifying Parties argue that the claimed benefits accrue directly to users. As
         pointed out in the SO, even though the claimed liquidity cost savings accrue on the
         customer side, the incentive on the part of the merged entity to leave efficiency gains
         from increased liquidity with customers depends on the existence of competitive
         pressure from the remaining firms in the market and from potential entry. Given that in
         the cash market, there is competitive pressure from other venues, the Commission
         would expect a partial pass-through of any potential cash related efficiencies.
   (1301) However, the Commission notes that, as outlined above in Section 12.3.3.2.1, the
         claimed liquidity-related efficiencies in the cash market have not been verified.
           Response of Alpha Strategien Triple MH, SEB Master Kapitalanlagegesellschaft to Questions 88.1 of
           Questionnaire Q2 [...]*. Response of [...]* to Questions 89 of Questionnaire Q2 [...]*.
   1119
           See for instance the references included in footnotes 1071, 1077 and 1087 of this Decision.
EN                                                        301                                                EN

   (1302) Therefore, the Commission considers that, to the extent there were to be any cash
           liquidity benefits, it is possible that there will be some pass-on to (that is net benefits
           left with) customers, but the size of this effect cannot be determined on the basis of the
           available data.
                          12.3.3.3.CONCLUSION        ON  LIQUIDITY      IMPACT     ON    INTEGRATED       CASH
                                    EXCHANGES
   (1303) Therefore, the Commission concludes that the efficiencies claimed by the Notifying
           Parties in the area of liquidity savings for the cash market are not verifiable. Even if
           they were verifiable, it is unclear how much of the savings would be passed on to
           customers (that is would materialise as net benefits for consumers). In any event, the
           claims of the Notifying Parties appear exaggerated based on the available evidence.
       12.3.4. Liquidity impact of integrated derivatives trading platforms
                          12.3.4.1.THE NOTIFYING PARTIES' CLAIMS
   (1304) As described above in Recital (1244), in the Form CO, the Notifying Parties made a
          general statement that the notified transaction would lead to an increase of liquidity
          resulting in a reduction in the implicit costs of trading.
   (1305) In their submission of 5 September 2011, the Notifying Parties claim that the
          integration of Euronext’s derivatives trading platforms in Amsterdam and Paris into
          LiffeCONNECT had an economically and statistically significant impact on the
          liquidity of Euronext’s derivatives platforms1120. In particular, the Notifying Parties
          claim that the integration of Euronext’s derivatives trading platforms increased the daily
          traded volumes of the AEX, CAC-40 and FTSE-100 equity index futures. According to
          the Notifying Parties, this effect is found to be material, statistically significant and
          robust. The Notifying Parties argue that Euronext’s past experience demonstrates that
          the notified transaction will have a positive effect on trading activity and liquidity and
          will, therefore, reduce the implicit costs of trading.
   (1306) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties explain that the econometrics study
           on derivatives liquidity was unable to calculate directly the reduction in bid-ask spread
           for derivatives traders1121. Instead, the Notifying Parties estimated the cost savings for
           derivatives by assuming that the increase in liquidity from the notified transaction had
           an effect of the same magnitude as cash trading and found, based on further
           assumptions, that the saving for derivatives would be around Euro […]* billion.1122
                          12.3.4.2.ANALYSIS
   (1307) In the SO and during the Oral Hearing, the Commission expressed concerns about
           the identification, questioned the robustness of the results and conveyed doubts whether
           the estimated effects can be mapped onto the notified transaction, as competitive and
   1120
             Padilla, J. and Coppi, L. "Assessing the liquidity effects of the creation of Euronext's integrated
             derivatives platform" of 5 September 2011.
   1121
             Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the Proposed Transaction" of 24 October 2011, page 55.
   1122
             Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the Proposed Transaction" of 24 October 2011, page 58.
EN                                                      302                                                      EN

         market circumstances have substantially changed. The Commission also observed that
         the Notifying Parties' analysis is limited to three equity index futures contracts and that
         the Notifying Parties have not shown whether any effect found for these contracts could
         be mapped to other derivatives contracts (options on these equity indices or
         futures/options on other underlyings) or whether opposite effects can be expected for
         other (more or less liquid) contracts. Finally, the Commission questioned the merger
         specificity and whether efficiency gains from increased liquidity would be left with
         customers.
   (1308) The analysis in this Section is solely based on data employed by the Notifying
         Parties in their analysis. The analysis confirms the concerns set out by the Commission
         in the SO1123 and responds to the claims made by the Notifying Parties in their
         submissions.
   12.3.4.2.1.     Verifiability
                            12.3.4.2.1.1.     Identification – inference from historical data
   (1309) The identification concerns raised in the context of cash trading equally hold true, all
         other things being equal, in the context of derivatives trading (see Section 12.3.3.2.1).
         In short, there are significant limitations in the natural experiment evidence provided by
         the Notifying Parties, due to the fact that changed circumstances potentially invalidate
         the extrapolation of past event impact estimates to the impact of current and
         qualitatively different events. In order to be able to estimate the effects of a new and
         qualitatively different merger with greater reliability, merger events that take place
         towards the end of the sample period (ideally of different size) would need to be
         observed.
                            12.3.4.2.1.2.     Criticism of the estimation approach and the calculation of
                                actual cost savings
   (1310) Setting aside the fundamental identification concerns, the Commission observes that
         the Notifying Parties state that "for the purpose of illustration" they aim to "give a
         sense of the order of magnitude of the savings expected to accrue to users" in the area
         of derivatives trading.1124 The calculation of the benefits is performed indirectly and
         based on a number of largely discretionary assumptions. This shortcut and indirect
         approach has significant shortcomings, which is relevant because the claimed resulting
         efficiencies for derivatives trading make up [50-80]*% (Euro […]* million) of the total
         claimed benefits for cash and derivatives trading and because the underlying
         assumptions are not innocuous and possibly overestimate the resulting cost saving.
   (1311) One of the assumptions retained by the Notifying Parties is that the reduction in
         implicit costs from the notified transaction for derivatives trading would be similar as
         for cash trading. To justify this assumption, the Notifying Parties refer to their finding
         that trading volumes seem to go up at least as much for derivatives trading as for cash
   1123
          In particular paragraphs 607, 608 and 610 of the SO.
   1124
          Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the Proposed Transaction" of 24 October 2011, page 55.
EN                                                     303                                                EN

         trading following the historical mergers. From these volume-related observations across
         entirely different regression models, the Notifying Parties conclude that the implicit
         cost reduction following a merger for derivatives trading must also at least be as high as
         for cash trading, namely […]*%. To begin with, and as discussed above, this figure
         itself is biased upward and, hence, unreliable. There are, however, further concerns with
         the Notifying Parties' methodology to verify the existence of merger-specific
         efficiencies for derivatives trading.
   (1312) The retained […]*% implicit cost reduction is inconsistent with the reported cash
         trading cost savings for two reasons. First, as spelled out in Recital (1289) above, the
         Notifying Parties used a different weighted average reduction in bid-ask spread in order
         to quantify their cash trading cost saving estimate. Second, it is inappropriate in this
         context to equate the concepts "implicit cost reduction" with "bid-ask spread". The
         latter may be a narrower concept as the former may include bid-ask spreads, but
         possibly also margin and collateral costs, technical and operational overhead costs,
         price-impact costs, etc. Hence, to claim that a given reduction in bid-ask spreads can be
         mapped one-to-one onto a broader implicit cost reduction may overestimate the true
         cost saving. Moreover, and more importantly, the employed shortcut is not appropriate
         both in general as well as in this specific case. It cannot simply be assumed that the
         impact of merger events on (narrowly or broadly defined) implicit costs across different
         asset classes is similar, based on the fact that the impact of different mergers on
         volumes across different asset classes is similar, given that the triggering events,
         underlying assets, regression approaches, price and demand elasticities and initial
         conditions may differ substantially.
   (1313) Moreover, the […]*% weighted average bid-ask spread reduction is applied to a
         rough estimate of total implicit cost of trading (Euro […]* million).1125 Importantly, the
         total implicit cost of trading in turn is inferred from the revenues from both exchanges
         (which are deemed explicit costs from the point of view of the exchange users) and an
         assumed split of total trading costs between explicit trading costs and implicit trading
         costs ([…]*% versus […]*%, respectively). In the approach taken, ultimate cost
         reductions will mechanically be found to be higher the higher the proportion of implicit
         costs to total trading costs. Whereas according to the Notifying Parties, the literature
         suggests that implicit costs for cash trading represent between 30% and 50% of total
         trading costs, the Notifying Parties believe that a higher proportion of implicit costs is
         warranted for European exchanges given that "the bulk of explicit costs are unrelated to
         exchanges as they are represented by brokerage or other intermediaries fees that are
         not set up by the Parties".1126 When brokerage fees are thus excluded from total trading
         costs, the Notifying Parties arrive at a split of […]*% explicit trading costs and […]*%
         implicit trading costs.
   (1314) The Commission considers that the brokerage and other intermediary fees that are
         being left out by the Notifying Parties also cover the broker or intermediary exchange
         costs for executing the trade on behalf of its client.1127 As a result, at least part of those
   1125
           Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the Proposed Transaction" of 24 October 2011, page 58, table 2.
   1126
           Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the Proposed Transaction" of 24 October 2011, page 57 lines 2-5.
   1127
           This is also confirmed by Pagano and Padilla (2005), "The Economics of Cash trading: An Overview",
           page 23: "Brokerage commissions provide revenues to brokers from which they must pay the trading
           and post-trade fees, charged by the exchange and clearing and settlement institutions respectively."
EN                                                      304                                                     EN

         brokerage fees should not be discarded from the calculation of the split between explicit
         and implicit exchange trading costs. If the split between explicit and implicit fees would
         thus be slightly altered to, say, […]*% explicit and […]*% implicit trading costs, the
         estimated cost savings would drop significantly from Euro […]* million.1128 This
         shows that the claimed and estimated efficiencies are extremely sensitive to the
         assumed split between explicit and implicit trading costs. The Commission also notes
         that in distinguishing between implicit and explicit trading costs, the Notifying Parties
         refer to literature that covers equity and cash trading, but not derivatives trading.1129 For
         these reasons, the Commission considers that the assumed split between explicit and
         implicit trading costs is likely to be exaggerated, which potentially biases the alleged
         efficiencies upwards.
   (1315) Furthermore, it is not clear why the Notifying Parties have not sought to estimate the
         reduction in bid-ask spreads directly.
                           12.3.4.2.1.3.       Liquidity measure
   (1316) The Notifying Parties base their estimation on equity index futures data only, and
         perform the impact analysis on daily traded volumes of the equity index futures
         (number of single contracts of futures). It is not explained why other liquidity measures
         such as bid-ask spreads or volatility have not been considered.
   (1317) Furthermore, the Notifying Parties point out that the merger could increase liquidity
         because of a distribution effect, where companies trading in just one platform could
         benefit from being able to trade in both platforms. At the time of the integration of the
         different derivatives trading platforms as a result of the Euronext mergers, the total
         volume controlled by companies1130 trading in the different exchanges which then
         merged into Euronext was lower than that generated by companies trading in both
         LIFFE and Eurex today. Although the change in overlap is lower to what was observed
         in the cash side, there is still a non negligible effect.1131 [In February 2003, a majority of
         volumes were generated by a small number of entities trading both on Paris and
         London]*. […]*.1132 […]*.
   1128
          The figure would further drop to €[…]* million if the split explicit versus implicit was .[…]*.
   1129
          Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the Proposed Transaction" of 24 October 2011, footnotes 68, 69,
          70, 71 and 72.
   1130
          For the purposes of this analysis, companies are aggregated according to the mother companies using
          data provided by the Notifying Parties in response to a request for information of 23 September 2011.
          Given that mother companies have control over the different subsidiaries trading at the different
          exchanges, it makes no sense to treat the different subsidiaries of for instance, JP Morgan, separately. It
          should be noted that these figures are a rough approximation and probably are a conservative estimation
          as all companies have not been able to be matched to the corresponding mother companies.
   1131
          It should be noted that the Notifying Parties have been unable to retrieve the data for Amsterdam for the
          years 2000 to 2005. Therefore, the current estimate for the overlap in 2003 is conservative and the
          volume generated by companies overlapping in the different exchanges is likely to be higher.
   1132
          In December 2010, there were […]* mother companies with overlapping volumes out of a total of […]*
          companies which generated positive volumes. For the whole of 2010, there were […]* companies
          overlapping in both platforms out of a total of […]* companies which traded during 2010. Comparing
          the figures for February 2003 with the figures for February 2010 (i.e. same month) would lead to the
          same conclusion. During February 2010 […]*% of trades were generated by companies trading on both
EN                                                       305                                                          EN

                           12.3.4.2.1.4.    Identification of the impact of the mergers at the time
   (1318) Similar to Section 12.3.4.2.1, graphs showing the average monthly effects of
         volumes for the different futures have been plotted without including any additional
         explanatory variables. Vertical lines to identify the different mergers have been
         included: the migration of the Brussels derivatives market (24 March 2003), the
         migration of the Paris derivatives market (14 April 2003) and the migration of
         Amsterdam derivatives market (29 November 2004). As described previously, a trend
         in volumes over time for AEX, CAC and FTSE is observed as can be seen in the graphs
         in Figure 17. Using the data provided by the Notifying Parties, this time, the pattern and
         trend that is observed for the three indices belonging to LIFFE is not significantly
         different from that of DAX, SMI and Euro Stock. As such, the deficiencies outlined in
         the cash liquidity Section in this respect are also applicable to the derivatives.
        Figure 17: Year-month fixed effects on volumes for futures
           platforms. There were […]* mother companies ([…]*%) with positive volumes out of a total of […]*
           mother companies which traded during February 2010.
EN                                                   306                                                    EN

EN 307 EN
EN 308 EN
                           12.3.4.2.1.5.       Results from the market investigation
   (1319) As outlined above in Recital (1294), in their response to the SO, the Notifying
         Parties argue that 76% of responsive market participants expect increased liquidity from
         the notified transaction by basing themselves on 37 responses which they reference in
         footnote 52 of their paper "Response to statement of objections - transaction-related
         efficiencies".
   (1320) 30 responses related to expectations about derivatives markets including 14
         responses to questionnaire one which was sent to 269 direct exchange customers (116
         customers responded), 7 responses to questionnaire 2 which was sent to 131 indirect
         exchange customers (39 customers responded) and 10 responses to questionnaire 5
         which was sent to 136 corporate customers (57 customers responded).
   (1321) 12 respondents outlined that there may be some potential for increased liquidity, but
         are rather uncertain1133. Two respondents state that they expect liquidity to improve, but
         in the same sentence refer to negative effects on trading fees.1134 One respondent's
   1133
          Response of Exane Group to Question 111 of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of BGC Cantor
          Fitzgerald to Question 111 of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of DRW Investments to Question 110
          of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of ING Bank to Question 110 of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response
          of DekaBank to question 55 of Questionnaire Q5 [...]*; Response of [...]* to Question 110 of
          Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of Instituto de gestao da tesouraria e do credito publico to Question
          110 of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of Eurohypo to Question 54.2 of Questionnaire Q5 [...]*;
          Response of Rorento to Question 54.2 of Questionnaire Q5 […]*; Response of Coca-Cola Enterprises
          Inc. to Question 54.2 of Questionnaire Q5 [...]*; Response of [...]* to Question Q47.2 of Questionnaire
          Q2 [...]*; Response of [...]* to Question 47.2 of Questionnaire Q2 [...]*.
   1134
          Response of Dexia to Question 110 of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of [...]*to Question 110 of
          Questionnaire Q1 [...]*.
EN                                                       309                                                      EN

         answer is conditional on reduction of double listings.1135 Another respondent only refers
         to the fact under the assumption that the merger would increase liquidity, then market
         participants would benefit. This leaves 14 respondents who stated that liquidity could
         increase.1136
   (1322) A liquidity effect may be expected in case a specific contract trades pre-merger on
         two different platforms, but would trade post-merger on one platform. This general idea
         that consolidation of split order books increases liquidity may explain the results of the
         market investigation. Respondents may have in mind a liquidity effect from
         consolidation of split order books. For instance, SEB AG explicitly states that
         "Liquidity will increase, if product double-listings are avoided"1137. However, this idea
         would only be relevant for certain single stock derivatives contracts for which no
         liquidity benefits have been evaluated by the Notifying Parties and which is a rather
         small portion compared to equity index derivatives and interest rate derivatives. In any
         case, new technology allows traders to look at global liquidity instead of liquidity at
         separate trading venues, reducing any negative impact of market fragmentation.
   (1323) In light of the above, the Commission considers that the Notifying Parties have
         significantly overstated their claims of increased liquidity in derivatives markets based
         on the market investigation. Whereas indeed some customers have voiced expectations
         that liquidity will increase, it was only a limited group of customers given the total
         number of customers who responded.
   (1324) Therefore, the Commission considers that the claimed liquidity benefits for the
         derivatives market are not verifiable.
   12.3.4.2.2.       Merger specificity
   (1325) It cannot reasonably be inferred from the submitted evidence that the derivatives
         liquidity benefits would materialise if the notified transaction were to be completed.
         Therefore, it is not necessary to examine whether these efficiencies could have been
         realised absent the notified transaction.
   12.3.4.2.3.       Consumer benefits
   (1326) The Notifying Parties argued that the claimed benefits accrue directly to users. As
         pointed out in the SO, even though the claimed liquidity cost savings accrue on the
         customer side, the incentive on the part of the merged entity to leave efficiency gains
   1135
           Response of SEB AG to Question 52.2 of Questionnaire Q5 [...]*.
   1136
           Response of BVI to Question 48 of Questionnaire Q2 [...]*; Response of Banco Santander Totta to
           Question 48 of Questionnaire Q2 [...]*; Response of [...]* to Question 48 of Questionnaire Q2 […]*;
           Response of Landesbank Berlin to Question 111 of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of WestLB to
           Question 110 of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of Equinet to Question 110 of Questionnaire Q1
           [...]*; Response of Caerus Trading to Question 110 of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of Banco BPI
           to Question 167 of Questionnaire Q1 [...]*; Response of [...]*to Questions 47 of Questionnaire Q2 [...]*;
           Response of Landesbank Saar to Question 54.2 of Questionnaire Q5 [...]*; Response of IFCO Systems
           to question 54.2 of Questionnaire Q5 [...]*; Response of CMA CGM S.A. to Question 54.1 of
           Questionnaire Q5 [...]*; Response of Société Générale to Question 109 of Questionnaire Q1
           [...]*;Response of Boussard&Gavaudan Asset Management to Question 47.2 of Questionnaire Q2 [...]*.
   1137
           SEB AG, response to question 52.2 of Questionnaire Q5 [...]*.
EN                                                      310                                                          EN

           from increased liquidity with customers depends on the existence of competitive
           pressure from the remaining firms in the market and from potential entry. In this
           respect, the Commission has found that the Notifying Parties would face no significant
           competition in the derivatives markets concerned, and therefore that the pass through of
           any efficiency and consequently the net benefits of consumers would be limited. The
           lack of disciplining pressure in the derivatives trading and clearing markets concerned
           would provide the ability and incentives to the Notifying Parties to increase
           membership fees or transaction fees for derivatives trading and clearing to outweigh
           any potential liquidity efficiency in the derivative market.
   (1327) Therefore, the Commission considers that, to the extent there were to be any
           derivatives liquidity benefits, there would be some pass-on to (that is net benefits with)
           customers, but the size of this effect cannot be determined on the basis of the available
           data.
                         12.3.4.3.CONCLUSION
   (1328) Therefore, the Commission concludes that the efficiencies claimed by the Notifying
           Parties in the area of liquidity savings for the derivatives market are not verifiable. Even
           if they were verifiable, it is unclear how much of the savings would be passed on to
           customers (that is would materialise as net benefits for consumers). In any event, the
           claims of the Notifying Parties appear exaggerated based on the available evidence.
       12.3.5. Economy-wide efficiencies
   (1329) The Notifying Parties claim in their submission on efficiencies that the liquidity
           effects of the notified transaction will not only benefit direct users of the Notifying
          Parties’ platforms, but will also have significant benefits on the wider economy.1138 The
          claims of the Notifying Parties in relation to economy-wide benefits of the notified
           transaction are founded on the assumption that it will result in increased liquidity1139. In
          order to consider any effects that follow-on from the liquidity effect, it first needs to be
          established whether there is a verifiable effect on liquidity in the claimed direction. As
          explained in Sections 12.3.3 (Liquidity impact on integrated cash exchanges) and
          12.3.4 (Liquidity impact of integrated derivatives trading platforms), the level and
          direction of such a claimed effect are unclear and have not been verified.
   (1330) In this context, it should also be noted that in their response to the SO, at the Oral
          Hearing and in their submissions of 1 and 20 December 2011 in relation to the
          proposed remedies, the Notifying Parties have also put forward more general arguments
          relating to alleged benefits of the notified transaction to the economy as a whole,
          including by facilitating the access of SMEs and larger businesses to equity finance,
          leading thereby to job creation. These also seem to be exclusively reliant upon claims of
          the transaction resulting in increased liquidity. The Commission has already outlined
          that no such liquidity benefits have been demonstrated by the Notifying Parties to result
          from the transaction to the requisite standard. To the extent that any such claimed
   1138
             Notifying Parties, Submission of 5 September 2011,"Economy-wide implications of the Transaction"
   1139
             Notifying Parties, Submission of 5 September 2011, "Economy-wide implications of the Transaction"
             where the Notifying Parties state that "This paper considers whether the liquidity effects of the
             Transaction will also have benefits on the wider economy".
EN                                                         311                                                 EN

           economy-wide efficiencies might be purported to exist resulting from factors other than
           the claimed increase in liquidity, it was not demonstrated by the Notifying Parties how
           these might arise, the mechanism of how such efficiencies might work, nor indeed any
           detail or substantiation of any kind to support such claims. As such, the Commission
           considers that the claimed economy-wide efficiencies are not verifiable.
       12.3.6. Cost synergies
   (1331) The Notifying Parties expect cost synergies resulting from the notified transaction in
           the following business segments: technology, clearing, market operations and corporate
           overhead. The Notifying Parties have estimated these savings to amount to Euro […]*
           million per year post integration, largely by consolidating duplicative cost centres. The
          Notifying Parties claim that substantially improving their cost structures is essential to
          remaining competitive and further developing the benefits of their regulated markets.
          According to the Notifying Parties, the cost savings generated by the notified
          transaction would therefore bound to inure to the benefit of users, and could not be
          achieved absent the notified transaction.
   (1332) In the SO, the Commission considered the claimed cost savings to be reductions in
          fixed costs and pointed to the Horizontal merger guidelines: "cost efficiencies that lead
          to reductions in variable or marginal costs are more likely to be relevant to the
          assessment of efficiencies than reductions in fixed costs; the former are, in principle,
          more likely to result in lower prices for consumers"1140. Additionally, the Commission
          specified that in any case, given the fact that post-merger, no significant competitive
          pressure would exist in the markets concerned as set out in the competitive assessment
          Section, it is unlikely that the Notifying Parties will have an incentive to pass on such
          cost savings fully to customers.
   (1333) In their response to the SO, the Notifying Parties claim that the Commission cannot
          simply assume that fixed costs will not benefit users. The Notifying Parties point out
          that the Commission's reasoning is based on the premise that "post-merger no
          significant competitive pressure would exist in the markets concerned as set out in the
          competitive assessment section" but that this statement says nothing about competitive
          pressure in markets that are not covered in the SO (for instance, cash) where, the
          Notifying Parties are subject to intense competitive pressure and buyers have strong
          countervailing power.
   (1334) Despite the arguments put forward by the Notifying Parties, and in light of the
          Horizontal Merger Guidelines, it is concluded that given the fact that post-merger, no
          significant competitive pressure would exist in the markets concerned as set out in the
          competitive assessment Section and the fact that different products offered by the
          Notifying Parties are complementary product serving the same customers, it is unlikely
          that fixed cost savings will be passed on to customers.
     12.4. CONCLUSION ON EFFICIENCIES
   (1335) Therefore, the Commission concludes that:
   1140
            Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 80.
EN                                                      312                                          EN

            (i)    the claimed reduction in the IT and user access costs of users of DB and NYSE
                   resulting from the consolidation of the trading and clearing platforms of the
                   Notifying Parties are not verifiable and even if it was (quod non), it remains
                   unclear whether these savings would be merger-specific and how much of
                   these savings would be passed on to customers;
            (ii)   some collateral savings are verifiable, although not at the level claimed by the
                   Notifying Parties. However, some of the expected collateral savings could be
                   attained through less anti-competitive means while only some of the savings
                   are likely to be passed on to customers given the elimination of the significant
                   competitive constraint the Notifying Parties may currently exercise on each
                   other with respect to collateral policy; and
            (iii) the liquidity impact of integrated cash and derivatives trading platforms is not
                   verifiable and even if it were (quod non), it cannot be determined how much of
                   the savings would be passed on to customers.
   (1336) As set out in the Horizontal Merger Guidelines, "it is highly unlikely that a merger
         leading to a market position approaching that of a monopoly, or leading to a similar
         level of market power, can be declared compatible with the common market on the
         ground that efficiency gains would be sufficient to counteract its potential anti-
         competitive effect" 1141.
   (1337) In the light of these principles and of the near monopoly resulting from the proposed
         transaction in a number of relevant markets as established in this Decision, any
         efficiencies, even if they were found to be verifiable, merger-specific, and likely to
         benefit consumers, would have to be particularly substantial to prevent the significant
         impediment to effective competition set out above, including the loss of actual and
         potential competition and the loss of competition in innovation.
   (1338) As set out in Section 12.3 of this Decision, only the collateral savings are verifiable.
         IT and user access benefits and liquidity benefits are not verifiable. The verifiable
         collateral savings are of an order of magnitude of Euro [40-120]* million. However,
         only part of that amount is merger-specific and only part of the merger-specific amount
         is likely to be passed on to customers. Therefore, the efficiencies that are verifiable,
         merger-specific and likely to benefit customers are most likely limited.
   (1339) Given the relatively small size of fees compared to the total cost of trading1142, the
         Commission considers it likely that the Notifying Parties would have the ability and the
         incentive to increase fees (or reduce rebates) substantially. For it to become
         unprofitable for the merged entity to increase its fees to an extent so that the fee
         increase outweighs the verifiable collateral savings, trading demand would have to be
         extremely elastic. This means that the fee increase would need to lead to a very large
         reduction in trading volume at the merged entity's trading platform. Given that the
         notified transaction would lead to the elimination of the closest actual and potential
         competitor, and the high barriers to entry and expansion in the markets in question,
   1141
           Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 84.
   1142
           See the Notifying Parties statements in Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the Proposed Transaction"
           of 24 October 2011, page 57.
EN                                                     313                                                      EN

         customers will have no alternative or possibility to switch to another platform. But the
         gains from using derivatives on exchange for hedging and investment purposes are
         expected to remain high relative to the changes in fees. Therefore, the Commission
         considers it likely that the merged entity would have the ability and the incentive to
         increase fees substantially1143.
   (1340) The verified annual cost savings can be put into perspective by expressing them as a
         percentage of the annual total revenues of the Notifying Parties from their derivatives
         business. The range of Euro [40-120]* million per year1144 represents […]* of the total
         annual revenues of the Notifying Parties from their derivatives business1145. Another
         way to put the verified annual cost savings into perspective would be to divide the
         annual cost saving by the total number of contracts traded on the Notifying Parties'
         platforms per year. The Notifying Parties' total on-book and off-book trading volumes
         by number of LTIR, STIR, equity index and single-stock derivatives contracts in 2010
         is […]*1146. The upper bound of Euro [100-120]* million divided by […]* gives […]*
         per contract and the lower bound of Euro [40-60]* million divided by […]* gives […]*
         per contract1147. This illustrates that a fee increase of […]* per contract would already
         be sufficient to recoup the collateral cost savings. This calculation assumes that all
         customers pay the same fees. However, the Notifying Parties are able to price
         discriminate as set out in Section 11.1.1.2.2.1.4 above. This means that the Notifying
         Parties could selectively impose price increases to those customers who are more price
         inelastic.
   (1341) On the basis of the evidence that the Notifying Parties submitted, the Commission
         cannot conclude that the efficiencies resulting from the proposed transaction would be
         substantial, likely to be realised, and likely to be passed on to a sufficient degree to the
         consumer, and that they would thus enhance the ability and incentive of the merged
         entity to act pro-competitively for the benefit of consumers, thereby counteracting the
         significant impediment of effective competition resulting from the notified transaction.
   (1342) Accordingly, the Commission considers that the efficiencies that the notified
         transaction might bring about are not sufficient to counteract the significant impediment
         to effective competition resulting from the notified transaction and established in this
         Decision.
   1143
           The Notifying Parties have suggested that "In order for the merged entity to fully claw back user
           benefits, implausibly high fee increases would be required". Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the
           proposed transaction" of 24 October 2011, page 25. However, the Notifying Parties base themselves on
           the fact that there are liquidity benefits of nearly Euro .[…]*. As set out in Section 12.3.3 and 12.3.4
           above the liquidity benefits are not verified.
   1144
           This assumes that the full amount would be merger-specific and remain with customers, which is not
           likely as set out in Section 12.3.2 above.
   1145
           The calculations are based on data provided in Section 1 of the Form CO. .[…]*.
   1146
           Annex D.20 of the Form CO.
   1147
           This is a rough estimate as the number of contracts executed in 2010 is used for the calculation. It
           should be recalled that current transaction fees are of an order of magnitude of EUR […]* (depending
           on the product and the identity of the customer) and that other recoupment possibilities (membership
           fees, connectivity charges, etc) are also possible. A similar estimation was set out in paragraph 583 of
           the SO.
EN                                                        314                                                       EN

   13.      COMMITMENTS
     13.1. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
   (1343) Where the Commission finds that a concentration raises competition concerns in that
          it could significantly impede effective competition, in particular as a result of the
          creation or strengthening of a dominant position, the parties may seek to modify the
          concentration in order to resolve the competition concerns and thereby gain clearance
          of their merger.1148
   (1344) Under the Merger Regulation, it is the responsibility of the Commission to show that
          a concentration would significantly impede effective competition. The Commission
          then communicates its competition concerns to the parties to allow them to formulate
          appropriate and corresponding remedies proposals1149. It is then for the parties to the
          concentration to put forward commitments.1150 The Commission only has power to
          accept commitments that are deemed capable of rendering the concentration compatible
          with the internal market so that they will prevent a significant impediment of effective
          competition in all relevant markets where competition concerns were identified.1151 To
          this aim, the commitments have to eliminate the competition concerns entirely1152 and
          have to be comprehensive and effective from all points of view.1153
   (1345) In assessing whether the proposed commitments will likely eliminate the competition
          concerns identified, the Commission considers all relevant factors including inter alia
          the type, scale and scope of the proposed commitments, judged by reference to the
          structure and particular characteristics of the market in which the competition concerns
          arise, including the position of the Notifying Parties and other participants on the
          market.1154
   1148
            See Commission notice on remedies acceptable under Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 and under
            Commission Regulation (EC) No 802/2004 (the "Remedies Notice"), OJ 2008/C 267/01, paragraph 5.
   1149
            However see Case T-209/01 Honeywell International, Inc. v. Commission [2005] II-05527 "It must be
            held that in matters relating to merger control the Commission cannot be required, over and above the
            obligation to set out its objections in a statement of objections and to supplement that statement if it
            should then decide to adopt new objections, to indicate, after service of the statement of objections and
            before adoption of the final decision, its current thinking as to the possible means of resolving the
            problems it has identified (see, to that effect, Case 53/69 Sandoz v Commission [1972] ECR 845,
            paragraph 14; Joined Cases C-204/00 P, C-205/00 P, C-211/00 P, C-213/00 P, C-217/00 P and C-
            219/00 P Aalborg Portland and Others v Commission [2004] ECR I-123, paragraphs 192 and 193;
            Case T-87/96 Assicurazioni Generali and Unicredito v Commission [1999] ECR II-203)."
   1150
            Remedies Notice, paragraph 6.
   1151
            Remedies Notice, paragraph 9.
   1152
            See also Case C-202/06 P Cementbouw Handel & Industrie v Commission [2007] ECR 2007 I-12129,
            paragraph 54: "it is necessary, when reviewing the proportionality of conditions or obligations which
            the Commission may, by virtue of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 4064/89, impose on the parties to a
            concentration, not to determine whether the concentration still has a Community dimension after those
            conditions or obligations have been complied with, but to be satisfied that those conditions and those
            obligations are proportionate to and would entirely eliminate the competition problem that has been
            identified."
   1153
            Remedies Notice, paragraph 9 and 61.
   1154
            Remedies Notice, paragraph 12.
EN                                                         315                                                        EN

   (1346) In order for the commitments to comply with these principles, commitments must be
         capable of being implemented effectively within a short period of time.1155 Where,
         however, the Notifying Parties submit remedies proposals that are so extensive and
         complex that it is not possible for the Commission to determine with the requisite
         degree of certainty, at the time of its decision, that they will be fully implemented and
         that they are likely to maintain effective competition in the market, an authorisation
         decision cannot be granted. 1156
   (1347) As concerns the form of acceptable commitments, the Merger Regulation leaves
         discretion to the Commission as long as the commitments meet the requisite
         standard.1157 Structural commitments will meet the conditions set out in Recital (1344)
         above only in so far as the Commission is able to conclude with the requisite degree of
         certainty that it will be possible to implement them and that it will be likely that the
         new commercial structures resulting from them will be sufficiently workable and
         lasting to ensure that the significant impediment to effective competition will not
         materialise.1158
   (1348) While divestiture commitments are generally the best way to eliminate competition
         concerns resulting from horizontal overlaps, other structural commitments, such as
         access remedies, may be suitable to resolve concerns if those remedies are equivalent to
         divestitures in their effects.1159 Commitments relating to the future behaviour of the
         merged entity may be acceptable only exceptionally in very specific circumstances.1160
   (1349) For access remedies to have an equivalent effect to divestitures, they must facilitate
         market entry by competitors to the extent that actual entry of new competitors would be
         timely, likely and sufficient to counteract any harm stemming from the concentration. If
         it cannot be concluded that the lowering of the entry barriers by the proposed
         commitments will likely lead to an effective entry of new competitors in the market, the
         Commission will reject such a remedies package. 1161
   (1350) It is against this background that the Commission assessed the viability, the
         workability, the effectiveness and the ability of the proposed commitments to entirely
         eliminate the competition concerns identified in Section 11.2 of this Decision. In this
         context, the Commission also analysed whether the proposed commitments are likely to
         lead to a timely and sufficient entry by a player capable of exerting competitive
         constraint on the merged entity so as to offset the anti-competitive effects arising from
         the concentration.
   1155
           Remedies Notice, paragraph 9.
   1156
           Remedies Notice, paragraphs 13, 14 and 61ff.
   1157
           Case T-177/04 easyJet v Commission [2006] ECR II-1913, paragraph 197: "Article 6(2) of Regulation
           No 4064/89 provides that the Commission may authorise a merger if the commitments proposed by the
           parties dispel the serious doubts as to the compatibility of the merger with the common market.
           Regulation No 4064/89 thus lays down the objective to be achieved by the Commission, but leaves it a
           wide discretion as to the form which the commitments in question may take."
   1158
           Remedies Notice, paragraph 10.
   1159
            Remedies Notice, paragraph 19.
   1160
           Remedies Notice, paragraph 17.
   1161
           Remedies Notice, paragraph 63.
EN                                                     316                                                      EN

   (1351) The Commission's conclusions with respect to the suitability of the submitted
           commitments are based on all available evidence, including the results of the two
           market tests and its own analysis against the criteria for acceptable remedies in merger
           cases contained in the Remedies Notice.1162
     13.2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED COMMITMENTS
   (1352) In order to address the competition concerns identified by the Commission in the SO,
           the Notifying Parties initially submitted a first set of commitments on 17 November
           2011 pursuant to Article 8(2) of the Merger Regulation. Those commitments were
           replaced by a revised set of commitments submitted on 21 November 2011 (hereinafter
           referred to as "Commitments of 21 November 2011"). The market test of this set of
           commitments was launched on 22 November 2011 in order to gather the views of
           relevant market participants1163 on the effectiveness of the commitments and their
           ability to restore effective competition in the markets where competition concerns were
           identified (the "first market test").
   (1353) Following the results of the first market test,1164the Notifying Parties submitted a new
           set of Commitments on 12 December 2011. Those commitments were further amended
           and replaced by commitments submitted on 14 December 2011 (the "Commitments of
           14 December 2011"). The market test of the Commitments of 14 December 2011 was
           launched on the same day (the "second market test").
       13.2.1. The Commitments of 21 November 2011
   (1354) The initial remedies package submitted on 21 November 2011 was essentially
           composed of two commitments, namely a divestment of parts of the Notifying Parties'
           single equity derivatives business (the "Divestment Commitment”) and an offer to grant
           access to the merged entity's margin pool for certain interest rate and equity index
           derivatives contracts (the Independent Third Party Access or "ITPA Commitment”).
   1162
             In their 17 January 2012 Submission in support of merger clearance, the Notifying Parties claimed that
             the Commission based its market test on responses from biased market participants and therefore that
             the market test should have been discounted by responses from all competitors as well as the Notifying
             Parties' customers which they claim are their competitors. In this respect, the Commission first notes
             that it made a critical, comprehensive and objective analysis of all responses. Second, the Commission
             notes that if the market participants the Notifying Parties claim are their competitors were to be
             excluded from the market test, it would mean that the Commission would have exclude close to a half
             of respondents and rely on responses of 53 companies out of total of 88. Third, the Commission notes
             that at the request of the Notifying Parties, it included close to 20 additional market participants in the
             second market test. Last, the Commission notes that even if it were to rely only on the responses of
             market participants that the Notifying Parties consider as not biased, the overall results of the market
             test would be similar. Out of those customers of this group that declared to have knowledge of
             derivatives markets and provided meaningful answer, a majority of 14 customers expressed a negative
             view on the proposed commitments while a minority of 10 customers were positive (some of them
             without substantiating their answers).
   1163
             The market test included various Notifying Parties' customers and competitors, clearing-houses, and
             regulators and supervisory bodies.
   1164
             A State-of-Play meeting between Commission services and the Notifying Parties took place on 6
             December 2011 to inform the Notifying Parties on the outcome of the market test.
EN                                                           317                                                         EN

        13.2.1.1.SUBSTANCE OF THE PROPOSAL
                         13.2.1.1.1. Divestment Commitment
   (1355) Pursuant to the Divestment Commitment, the divestment business in the area of
           single stock equity derivatives as specified in the Commitments of 21 November 2011
           included the following main assets:
                     - NYX’s single equity derivatives contracts listed on NYSE Liffe in London,
                          U.K., including open interest created on the LIFFE CONNECT central
                          order book platform and an ongoing right to the contractual/rules based
                          framework in which the rights arise and subsist, except single stock equity
                          options on Belgian, French, Dutch, Portuguese, and U.K. ("NYX’s home
                          markets") underlyings, and including the open interest, a non-exclusive
                          license to use and modify certain intellectual property, certain IT-related
                          services, historical market data, necessary staff/employees;
                     - NYX’s Bclear facility, except as it relates to equity index derivatives,
                          commodity derivatives, and single equity options contracts on underlyings
                          listed in NYX’s home markets, including contracts and open interest for all
                          single equity futures contracts (regardless of the country of underlying) and
                          all single equity options contracts on underlyings from countries other than
                          NYX’s home markets, available through NYX’s Bclear facility, licenses,
                          permits, and authorisations for software, dedicated hardware systems and
                          documentation; and
                     - DB's contracts and open interest in single stock equity options available on
                          the central order book, through OTC block trades, and through OTC Flex
                          based on U.K., French, Dutch, and Belgian, underlying stocks operated as
                          part of the Eurex Deutschland and Eurex Zurich trading platforms, with
                          related assets, including historical market data.
                         13.2.1.1.2. ITPA Commitment
   (1356) The ITPA Commitment as specified in the Commitments of 21 November 2011
           consisted in the commitment to provide access to the merged entity’s clearing-house
           and margin pool, including the services related to risk management, infrastructure and
           network as well as default mechanisms, to eligible Independent Third Parties ("ITPs")
           for certain eligible derivative contracts, based on European bond, European equity
           index or European interest rate underlyings. Essentially, for contracts to be eligible for
           the ITPA under the commitment package of 21 November 2011, ITP contracts had to
           have a correlation coefficient1165 no greater than 85% compared to contracts already in
           the merged entity’s margin pool including contracts of the merged entity and other
   1165
            See footnote 158 for definition of correlation. Contracts having 100% correlation can be netted if they
            are fungible.
EN                                                        318                                                       EN

         contracts that had been introduced into the margin pool pursuant to these
         commitments.1166
   (1357) Pursuant to the ITPA Commitment, introduction of identical products to those
         already in the merged entity’s margin pool would not be allowed in principle. Howver,
         there is one exception: during the first year following the launch of a new product1167,
         by an ITP or the merged entity, any other ITP and the merged entity would be in a
         position to launch derivatives contracts to be cleared and cross-margined through the
         merged entity’s clearing-house that are identical or similar to the new product. Once
         this one-year innovation period has elapsed, any contract to be introduced to the merged
         entity’s margin pool would have to meet the eligibility criteria defined by the
         correlation thresholds.
   (1358) For a third party to be eligible as an ITP, it had to operate a regulated market
         domiciled in the European Union and be authorised to trade interest rate and equity
         index derivatives by the competent supervisory authorities.1168
   (1359) The access to the merged entity’s margin pool would be granted to ITPs following an
         application procedure managed by an ITPA Committee which would be composed of
         four members, including one independent member. 1169 ITPA would be granted under
         the terms of a five-year Clearing Services Agreement (“CSA”),1170 subject to a number
         of access charges determined by the merged entity on a Fair, Reasonable and Non-
         Discriminatory (“FRAND”) basis.1171
   1166
          Pursuant to Section B.5.c) of the ITPA Commitment “Existing Contracts” shall mean (i) all Established
          Parties’ Contracts, (ii) all Derivatives Contracts that are not Established Parties’ Contracts, whether of
          an ITP Market, a Market operated by the Parties or any of their Affiliated Undertakings (a “Parties
          Market”) or any third party, cleared by the Clearing-house with a Launch Date that does not fall within
          a one-year innovation period prior to the Contract Clearing Request Date of a proposed ITP Contract
          (such period, “Innovation Period”), and (iii) all Derivatives Contracts that are not Established Parties’
          Contracts and that are traded on a Parties’ Market but are not cleared by the Clearing-house.
          The correlation coefficient will be calculated in accordance with a specified mathematical formula by
          setting the price values in the time series of each contract to the fair value of the respective contract.
          As concerns equity index derivatives, apart form the correlation coefficient requirement, eligibility for
          ITPA is conditional on the value of assets under management linked to the Equity Index Underlying in
          excess of EUR 500 million over a 3-month period prior to the date on which a relevant request for ITPA
          is determined to be complete.
   1167
          Launch date being defined as "the earlier of (i) the public announcement of a proposed Derivatives
          Contract (e.g. a press release to its trading community) by an ITP Market, a Parties’ Market or any
          third party market, or (ii) the start of clearing of this Derivatives Contract by the Clearinghouse.”
   1168
          See point 1 d) of the ITPA commitment.
   1169
          The role of the ITPA Committee is essentially three-fold: (i) to determine whether applications are
          complete or what additional information is required; (ii) to determine whether the relevant applicant and
          proposed derivatives contract satisfy the criteria for ITPA; and (iii) to ratify any modifications to the
          standard form of CSA proposed by the merged entity’s clearing-house to reflect legal and market
          developments (for example changed business models of the clearing members) from time to time.
   1170
          The ITP may request a shorter term, provided, however, that the minimum term of a CSA shall not be
          less than three years. The merged entity’s clearing-house will assist the ITP (at cost) for up to six
          months following the end of the CSA to migrate the ITP contracts to a clearing-house appointed by the
          ITP.
   1171
          Under the ITPA Commitment, ITPA will be subject according to the following access charges: (i) a
          cost-based ITPA Connection Charge and (ii) a cost-based ITPA Contract Implementation Charge,
          payable as of the clearing readiness of the merged entity’s clearing-house, respectively in respect of the
          ITP Market and of the particular ITP contract; (iii) a cost-based monthly ITPA Maintenance Charge;
EN                                                         319                                                       EN

   (1360) The ITPA remedy was meant to be in place for a period of three years from closing
           of the transaction, with a possibility of being extended by the Commission for one
           additional two- year period.
        13.2.1.2.RESULTS OF THE FIRST MARKET TEST
   (1361) During the first market test almost 200 questionnaires were sent to various market
           participants, namely competitors, customers, post-trade services providers and financial
           regulators and over 100 replies were received.1172
   (1362) The notifying Parties were informed of the results of the first market test at a State of
           Play meeting of 6 December 2011.
   (1363) The results of the first market test were overall negative. A significant majority of
           market participants expressed concerns about the workability and the effectiveness of
           the proposed remedies package as well as its ability to restore competition in the
           derivatives markets concerned.
                          13.2.1.2.1. Divestment Commitment
   (1364) Specifically, as concerns the proposed divestment business, market participants
           expressed concerns that the carved-out divestment business consisting in a combination
           of parts of NYX’ and DB’s single equity derivatives businesses lacked sufficient scale
           and was comprised of the least liquid and therefore unattractive contracts. In addition,
           the market test revealed that single equity derivatives contracts exist in a symbiotic
           relationship with the underlying cash equities on the one hand and with equity index
           derivatives on the other hand. For instance, one customer explained that "[o]ffering
           trading of single stock derivates by an exchange only would be successful, if it would
           [be]* combined with the trading of equity index contracts."1173 As a result, market
           participants considered that in the absence of cross-margining opportunities with
           closely connected contracts, the divested margin pool would most likely be quickly
           eroded. Similarly, customers explained that because equity derivatives are often
           physically settled, they are also closely tied to the cash equities on which they are
           based. As a result, the purchaser would need to be active in cash trading and clearing of
           the underlying equities, similar to Liffe and Eurex.
             and (iv) a monthly ITPA Contract Clearing Charge including the clearing fee, to be agreed between the
             merged entity’s clearing-house and the ITP for any ITP contract.
   1172
             More precisely, the Commission sent 183 questionnaires: 44 to competitors (20 replies); 115 to direct
             exchange customers (74 replies); 10 to regulators (7 replies); and 14 to clearing-houses and Euroclear (5
             replies). As was the case for the market investigation (see above footnote 18 of this Decision), in its
             assessment of the market test, the Commission considered only informative responses, i.e. the
             Commission has not taken into account the replies of those market participants who declared that they
             were not able to respond to certain questions due to lack of information, experience and/or knowledge.
   1173
             DZ BANK AG, response to question 7 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17
             November 2011 – Customers [...]*. 26 out of 36 customers considered that the divested margin pool
             cannot be viable on a lasting basis without open interest in other products. 11 out of 11 competitors
             indicated that a purchaser of the divestment business could not successfully run this business without
             offering, in particular, equity index derivatives: see responses to question 19 of questionnaire "Market
             test of commitments offered on 17 November 2011 – Competitors."
EN                                                          320                                                        EN

   (1365) Given that the divestment business did not foresee divestiture of any of these
         symbiotic products, the link would be broken putting strain on the sustainability of the
         divestment business over time. This is because the sustainability of a margin pool
         depends on a cross-selection of contracts, the ability to offer margin offsets and the
         breadth of the product portfolio. As a result, market participants expressed serious
         concerns about the viability on a lasting basis of the divestment business.
   (1366) As concerns the technical aspects of the transfer of the divestment business, the
         market test provided indications that while technically speaking, the transfer of open
         interest is possible, there are a number of hurdles associated with such an exercise
         which could affect the incentives of customers to maintain the open interest with the
         new acquirer and which would have to be adequately addressed. In this context, a
         majority of customers that responded to the first market test indicated that their likely
         reaction to the divestment of the concerned business would be to close out their current
         open interest in the divested contracts and/or transfer their open interest to the merged
         entity or in any event to the pool where more liquidity is concentrated.1174 Indeed, as
         clearly stated by a customer, "Clients must be economically motivated to transfer open
         interest. Normally an equivalent set of conditions will not induce customers to transfer
         open interest from one location to another. Therefore, notwithstanding whether open
         interest may be readily transferrable or not, the question perhaps should be whether a
         post-merger environment is likely to produce circumstances that are advantageous for
         clients. In the absence of the two largest European exchanges competing with each
         other, there is no reason to believe clients would wish to transfer positions regardless
         of technical ease."1175
   (1367) Similarly, competitors pointed out that any transfer of margin pool would necessarily
         imply connectivity costs for customers which would further decrease customers'
         incentives to transfer their contracts to the new acquirer and support its business. In the
         same vein, regulatory uncertainties inherent to such a transfer would also have to be
         managed. In this context, financial regulators […]* pointed at difficulties related to
         such a transfer[…]*1176
   (1368) Overall, market participants generally indicated that the scope of the proposed
         divestment business was insufficient to restore the competition that would be lost as a
         result of the proposed merger between Eurex and Liffe in the area of single equity
         derivatives. This was because of the mix and match approach to the divested contracts,
         the lack of cross-margining opportunities with other products and the issues associated
         with the transfer of the open interest.
   1174
          See responses to question 3 of questionnaires "Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Customers." Out of 41 informative responses, 20 customers indicated the view expressed in the
          text, while only 8 indicated that they would move their open interest to the Purchaser. The choice of 10
          of the remaining customers would be dependent on the identity of the Purchaser, as summarised by one
          customer, "on who the purchaser is. i.e availability of margin offsets, membership, cost of trading
          platform" (Citigroup Global Markets Limited, response to question 3 of questionnaire Market test of
          commitments offered on 17 November 2011 – Customers [...]*), while for the other 3 it would depend
          on the clients' choice or other exogenous factors.
   1175
          BGC (Cantor Fitzgerald Group), response to question 8 of questionnaire Market test of commitments
          offered on 17 November 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1176
          […]*.
EN                                                      321                                                        EN

   (1369) It follows that competitors were almost universally of the opinion that the proposed
         divestment business was commercially unattractive. Only Wiener Boerse and
         NASDAQ OMX1177 indicated that they would be potentially under certain conditions
         interested in acquiring the divestment business in its form as specified in the
         commitments.
                        13.2.1.2.2. ITPA Commitment
   (1370) As concerns the ITPA Commitment, the first market test identified that besides a
         range of key concerns relating to the very workability of any access arrangement, the
         fundamental shortcoming of the proposal was that the scope of the ITPA was limited to
         new contracts.
   (1371) Indeed, according to the market participants the limitation of the ITPA commitment
         to materially new contracts (defined by a correlation coefficient of less than 85% with
         all existing contracts of the merged entity) would preclude the introduction of virtually
         all existing contracts based on European financial derivatives that are currently traded
         by the Notifying Parties and their competitors as well as any innovations based on
         existing products such as product adjacencies. By way of example, Chi-X Europe
         explained in relation to the indices it is currently working on in cooperation with
         Russell that "the correlation of CXE’s range of Chi-X Europe Russell Indices (CHERI)
         with EURO STOXX 50 are: CHERI Euro 40: 99.85%; CHERI Eurozone: 99.48%;
         CHERI Pan Europe 60: 95.44%; CHERI PanEurope: 95.90%"1178 and therefore would
         be excluded from the scope of the ITPA Commitment. In the same vein, the LSE
         specified that, despite the fact that "one would anticipate that the FTSE MIB index (the
         benchmark stock market index for stocks listed in Italy) would be significantly
         differentiated from the EuroStoxx 50", "the inclusion of various blue chip pan-
         European stocks in each means that the correlation co-efficient is 96%."1179
   (1372) Similarly, the scope of the definition for eligible ITPs was criticised as being unclear
         and possibly too restrictive. Indeed, it was suggested by competitors that under a certain
         reading, non-regulated markets and MTFs in particular would be excluded from the
         scope of the ITPA commitment. In this respect, many potential entrants were not able to
   1177
          However, despite NASDAQ expressing a conditional interest in the divestment business, NASDAQ
          expressed serious doubts about the viability of the business and its chances to successfully compete
          with the merged entity: "We believe that the value of the divestment business is limited due to the
          tremendous competitive advantage that DB NYX would hold over us or any other buyer. In our case, we
          would assign the greatest value to Nordic-stock-based products because of our existing presence in this
          region. By contrast, since we lack substantial presence elsewhere in Europe, acquiring the remainder of
          the package would be a highly risky and speculative endeavor. We think the same would hold true for
          any other potential buyer. Given the combined entity’s clearing pool size, distribution network, and
          overall dominance in this business, competitively challenging it in single-stock derivatives would be a
          brave proposition. We believe that the price any potential acquirer would be willing to pay would
          reflect the low chances of ultimate competitive success." See NASDAQ OMX response to question 25
          of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November 2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1178
          Chi-X Europe, response to question 29 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17
          November 2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1179
          London Stock Exchange, covering letter to the response to questionnaire Market test of commitments
          offered on 17 November 2011 – Competitors [...]*.
EN                                                      322                                                       EN

         assess their eligibility on the basis of the definition provided in the commitments.1180
         Uncertainties in this regard were also highlighted by some regulators. […]*1181
         […]*1182
   (1373) As concerns the procedure to obtain access, market participants generally expressed
         concerns about the role and the composition of the ITPA Committee as well as the
         timeframes within which decisions on the eligibility of ITPs and contracts were to be
         taken. Indeed according to market participants, the Commitments of 21 November 2011
         did not provide for sufficient safeguards that the access procedure would be conducted
         in a non-discriminatory and timely manner.1183
   (1374) In relation to the one-year innovation period during which it is foreseen that a new
         contract can be copied by the merged entity or another ITP, some market participants
         expressed concerns that the limitation period is, first, inconsistent with its purpose to
         provide competitors with incentives for innovating and introducing new contracts, a
         protection should be given in the first period after launch and, under these
         circumstances, one year would be a too short term for a derivative to prove its
         success.1184 Second, such a limitation could affect the incentives of new entrants to
         introduce new contracts as their innovations could be copied by the merged entity,
         which would have the advantage of its very substantial margin pool, and which would
         therefore put the new entrant at a disadvantage in the eyes of its customers. Indeed, as
         specified by ICAP, the "risk of the merged entity quickly copying an ITP contract and
         entering aggressively to eliminate ITP entry may well act as a significant disincentive
         to entry by an ITP."1185Similarly, according to competitors, the one-year innovation
         period invalidates the effectiveness of the remedy itself.1186 Indeed, while ITPA aims at
         creating an equal footing framework under which competition should occur, it is
         unlikely to achieve its aim because, as clearly outlined by CME, "the merged entity’s
         copycat product would have an advantage due to the merged entity’s distribution
   1180
           See replies to question 43 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November 2011 –
           Competitors, reading "In your view, does the test for eligible ITP provide for an objective and clear-cut
           criterion to determine those entities entitled to apply for ITPA? In this context please explain whether
           under the wording provided for in the commitments there is any room for interpretation that could
           create uncertainly as to who qualifies as ITP and possibly exclude certain applicants." Only London
           and Warsaw Stock Exchanges replied yes to this question, but the former added that there is "room for
           misinterpretation [...] in relation to the criterion for determining eligibility for ITPA, where there is
           some scope for disagreement over whether an MTF from another jurisdiction is bound by the same
           regulatory obligations as the Parties’ regulated markets", [...]*, and the latter "room for some
           interpretation may be in the case of "the same regulatory obligations", as there may be slightly different
           obligations in various Member States" [...]*. Moreover Barclays, which also replied yes to the above-
           mentioned question, when asked whether the test for an eligible ITP provided for in the Commitments
           encompassed all potential new entrants in this area, declared not to be in a position to comment [...]*.
   1181
           […]*.
   1182
           […]*.
   1183
           See replies to questions, mong the others, 17, 22, 30 and 39 of Market test of commitments offered on
           17 November 2011 – Customers and to questions 51 and 52Market test of commitments offered on 17
           November 2011 – Competitors.
   1184
           See replies to question 27 of Market test of commitments offered on 17 November 2011 – Customers
           and to question 40 Market test of commitments offered on 17 November 2011 – Competitors.
   1185
           ICAP, response to question 52 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
           2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1186
           See replies to question 40, 41 and 42 Market test of commitments offered on 17 November 2011 –
           Competitors.
EN                                                        323                                                         EN

         network, scale benefits, and its ability to absorb low margins on the new product"1187.
         In the same vein, Chi-X Europe stated that "the merged entity should be allowed to
         compete with an ITP’s new product in the first 12 months. The merged entity would
         already have a very significant competitive advantage and could easily replicate the
         new contract should it choose to do so. Furthermore, the merged entity would be aware
         of ITPs intentions well in advance of the rest of the market given the need to negotiate
         commercials and contracts, define requirements and timetable system changes. The 12
         month period itself should not start until the ITP has gone live with its new
         product."1188
   (1375) Customers also expressed dissatisfaction with such a limitation of direct competition
         and specified that if anything, this would limit ITP's chances for success in this product.
         In this respect, a customer expressed the view that "[p]rohibiting competition between
         products after a one year launch period is not a concept we have come across in any
         other industry or sector (financial services or any other industry) and appears to be
         designed to erect competitive barriers and create a monopoly position. If the merged
         entity can immediately copy any products launched by an ITP it is easy to imagine this
         being used to kill off the ITP's product and ensure that the merged exchange's version
         succeeds in its place. The correlation point is material here and erects a significant
         barrier to entry for new products, but when the barrier is passed then the merged firm
         can immediately replicate and seek to take the liquidity. This seems anti-
         competitive."1189 Regulators, and the FOA in particular, expressed similar concerns:
         "the one-year limit will provide an opportunity for the merged entity to list the same
         contract and trade it in competition with the new derivative contract - in so doing, the
         merged entity could reduce the chances of the new contract introduced by an ITP
         establishing sufficient liquidity and open interest - once one year has elapsed, no other
         competitor can become an ITP for this contract unless the 85% correlation criteria is
         met."1190
   (1376) Concerns were also expressed about the various access charges set out in the
         commitments. First, market participants pointed out that some charges such as the
         minimal monthly clearing charge set at EUR […]* may not be adequate. Whilst
         LCH.Clearnet explained that "[t]here is no comparator as there is no case where an
         exchange offering trading services in listed derivatives has access to the same clearing
         provider as a competitor and obtains offsets with products traded by the
         competitor,"1191 EuroCCP indicated that "[...]* It is unclear why the Contract Clearing
         Charge is subject to a […]* Euro per month minimum."1192 Second, a general concern
         was expressed in relation to the possibility to set access charges in a transparent and
   1187
          CME, response to question 40 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1188
          Chi-X Europe, response to question 40 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17
          November 2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1189
          Nomura, response to question 27 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1190
          FOA, response to question 27 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1191
          LCH.Clearnet, response to question 35 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17
          November 2011 – Clearing-houses [...]*.
   1192
          EuroCCP, response to question 35 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17
          November 2011 – Clearing-houses [...]*.
EN                                                   324                                                     EN

         non-discriminatory manner in view of the fact that the merged entity will operate an
         integrated vertical silo model where trading and clearing fees are bundled in one fee. In
         this respect, competitors indicated that there is no commercial benchmark reference for
         such charges and, to be transparent, any fee-setting mechanism would necessarily
         require unbundling of trading and clearing fees of the merged entity and a considerable
         degree of regulatory oversight.1193
   (1377) Overall, according to the results of the market test, and in view of the complexity of
         the proposed remedy, the ITPA commitment would be difficult to implement and
         monitor as there is ample room for discrimination on the part of the merged entity, in
         particular as concerns the determination of eligible ITPs, of eligible "new" contracts
         and of access fees.
   (1378) Most importantly, competitors also indicated that the proposed access commitments
         would not lower the barriers to entry such that sufficient and timely entry is likely to
         occur neither in the market for trading and clearing of European equity index
         derivatives, nor in that for trading and clearing of European interest rate derivatives.1194
         Indeed, none of the actual or potential competitors indicated that they would consider
         applying for access pursuant to the ITPA remedy as designed in the commitments of 21
         November 2011.
                       13.2.1.2.3. Overall package
   (1379) As concerns the suitability, workability and the effectiveness of the overall package,
         with one exception,1195 all competitors indicated that the Commitments of 21 November
         2011, combining a divestment and access remedy in different product areas, would not
         provide a new entrant with the tools to effectively compete with the merged entity on an
         ongoing basis.1196 In particular, according to competitors that responded to the first
         market test, even if one company were to take advantage of both the divestment and
         access remedy, it would not be able to constrain the merged entity in a similar way as
         Eurex and Liffe constrain each other pre-merger.1197
   (1380) This is not only because the size of the divestment business as specified in the
         Commitments of 21 November 2011 is very small compared to that of the merged
   1193
          See responses to question 46 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Competitors.
   1194
          See responses to questions 56 and 57 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17
          November 2011 – Competitors. In both cases, 9 out of 11 competitors indicated that the proposed
          access commitments would not lower the barriers to entry.
   1195
          Warsaw Stock Exchange, response to question 69 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered
          on 17 November 2011 – Competitors [...]*: "We believe that the proposed package is designed to
          preserve the current level of competition, ie. it prevents the current level of competition to decrease. It
          does not necessarily mean that any other company will be able to compete with the merged company in
          every market. Taking account the current interest rates derivatives volumes, this business is already
          concentrated on Euronext.Liffe and the merger will not change this situation to a great extent."
   1196
          See responses to question 69 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Competitors.
   1197
          See responses to question 71 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Competitors. Only the Warsaw Stock Exchange believed that "the package is designed
          specifically to preserve the current level of competition, and it may be successful. We believe it is not
          necessary that all the divestments are acquired by one company" [...]*.
EN                                                       325                                                          EN

         entity, but more importantly, because of the splitting of the purchaser's margin pool,
         which would put the Purchaser at an inherent disadvantage vis-à-vis the merged entity.
         Indeed, in the context of the interplay between the various parts of the commitments
         package, market participants expressed concerns that the combination of the various
         legs of the commitments would lead to the splitting of the margin pool as different
         contracts would be subject to different clearing arrangements. This is because interest
         rate and equity index contracts eligible for ITPA would be cleared within the margin
         pool of the merged entity whereas single equity derivatives and other non eligible
         contracts would have to be cleared at another clearing-house. This would affect
         customers' incentives to trade with the merged entity's competitors, given that
         customers, as shown by the market test, prefer trading at a platform offering widest
         possible product portfolio automatically increasing cross-margining possibilities.1198
   (1381) To build up enough critical mass to be viable, the divestment business would have to
         have access to a margin pool of correlated contracts with already existing sufficient
         scale or to that of the merged entity. Either way, the problems affecting each leg of the
         remedy package, highlighted above, would prevent the Commitments of 21 November
         2011 to be effective even when a single competitor were to benefit from the whole
         package.
   (1382) On this basis, virtually no competitor considered that the proposed remedies package
         would have the potential to create a viable competitive business which could replicate
         the constraint that pre-merger the Notifying Parties exert on each other and, therefore,
         effectively compete with the merged entity in the area of derivatives trading and
         clearing in Europe (specifically in the area of European single stock equity derivatives,
         European interest rate derivatives (short-term and long-term) and European equity
         index derivatives).1199 Moreover, no competitor considered that the remedies package
         as a whole could be effectively implemented in practice.1200
   (1383) In terms of monitoring of the overall package while they considered that the
         proposed package could be in theory monitored in practice,1201 competitors indicated
         that the negotiation of access agreements for specific new contracts would be
         burdensome and lead to situations of conflict. Similarly, competitors expressed
   1198
          See responses to question 42 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Customers. 30 out of 45 customers pointed out the disadvantages of having the single stock
          equity business in a different margin pool than interest rate and equity index contracts, in particular in
          terms of the higher cost of trading as a consequence of not being able to benefit from cross margin
          offsets of a consolidated clearing portfolio.
   1199
          See responses to question 72 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Competitors. Only the Warsaw Stock Exchange, in its reply to question 69 of questionnaire
          Market test of commitments offered on 17 November 2011 – Competitors, indicated that "the proposed
          package is designed to preserve the current level of competition, ie. it prevents the current level of
          competition to decrease. It does not necessarily mean that any other company will be able to compete
          with the merged company in every market. Taking account the current interest rates derivatives
          volumes, this business is already concentrated on Euronext.Liffe and the merger will not change this
          situation to a great extent" [...]*.
   1200
          See responses to question 73 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Competitors.
   1201
          See responses to question 74 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
          2011 – Competitors.
EN                                                      326                                                          EN

           concerns that in the absence of regulatory oversight, the non-discriminatory and
           transparent application of the various eligibility criteria could not be properly enforced.
   (1384) On the basis of these results of the market test and the Commission's analysis of the
           Commitments of 21 November 2011 it was concluded that the Commitments of 21
           November 2011 were considered as insufficient to resolve the competition concerns
           identified in the SO, difficult to be implemented in practice and unlikely to be effective
           in practice as no entrant stated unconditional interest in either leg of the remedy.1202
       13.2.2. Commitments of 14 December 2011
   (1385) In view of the results of the first market test, the Notifying Parties submitted a new
           package of commitments on 12 December 2011, subsequently amended by a package of
           14 December 2011 (the "Commitments of 14 December 2011).
   (1386) As compared to the Commitments of 21 November 2011, the Commitments of 14
           December 2011 essentially contains some changes to the previous commitments (as
           concerns both the Divestment Commitment and the ITPA Commitment); and a new
           commitment to grant a licence to Eurex's trading software for interest rate derivatives.
        13.2.2.1.AMENDED DIVESTMENT COMMITMENT
   (1387) As concerns the Divestment commitment, the Commitments of 14 December 2011
           contains two main changes as compared to the Commitments of 21 November 2011.
   (1388) First, to address the criticism of adopting a "mix and match approach"1203 by
           combining NYX's and DB's contracts, the Divestment business would comprise the
           entire NYX single equity derivatives business, including in NYX's home markets where
           the divestment would be subject to relevant regulatory approvals. In case, and to the
           extent, the approvals are not obtained in some of these countries, DB's business in those
           countries would be divested. In practice, this means that depending on regulatory
           approvals the Divestment business would have two alternative scopes: either it would
           comprise the single equity derivatives business in all NYX markets, or it would be a
           combination of NYX business and DB's business in markets where regulatory approval
           was not obtained for the relevant NYX business.1204
   (1389) Second, to address the criticism of a split margin pool between various types of
           contracts, the Notifying Parties proposed, at the option of the Purchaser, to make
           available the merged entity's clearing for the contracts comprised in the Divestment
           business and any other single equity derivatives contracts listed on the Purchaser's
           platform. The offered clearing service would include cross-margining with single equity
           and equity index contracts cleared at Eurex Clearing. However, the commitment does
   1202
             The Notifying Parties were informed of the results of the first market test at a State of Play meeting of 6
             December 2011.
   1203
             As a matter of principle, commitments whereby assets come from several parties cerate additional risk
             about the viability and competitiveness of divestment business. See Remedies Notice, paragraph 37.
   1204
             If the regulatory approvals were not obtained in any of the NYX home markets, the scope of the
             Divestment business would be exactly the same as the one proposed in the Commitments of 21
             November 2011.
EN                                                         327                                                           EN

           not foresee fungibility1205 of the Purchaser's contracts and the merged entity's contracts
           based on the same single equity underlying and therefore netting is expressly excluded
           from the scope of the commitment. This new commitment to provide access for single
           equity derivatives would be of benefit to the Purchaser of the Divestment business
           only.1206
        13.2.2.2.AMENDED ITPA COMMITMENT
   (1390) As regards the ITPA commitment, the modifications brought about in the
           Commitments of 14 December 2011 concern three main areas, namely the level of
           correlation thresholds for certain eligible contracts, the definition of ITPs eligible to
           apply for access and the role and composition of the ITPA Committee. Besides these
           three areas, some changes to the application for access procedure and the firewall
           mechanism were also included in the new proposal.
   (1391) First, as concerns the correlation thresholds, the new proposal maintains the
           overarching idea that only materially new contracts are eligible for access pursuant to
           the commitments. However, in response to the criticism that the set correlation
           thresholds were too low and therefore excluded most of the contracts that are either
           currently traded by the Notifying Parties' competitors or are in product development
           stage, the Commitments of 14 December 2011 provide for higher correlation thresholds
           for some categories of contracts. In particular, the Commitments of 14 December 2011
           contain increased correlation coefficients for eligible bond and equity index derivatives
           contracts therefore bringing the admissible correlation coefficient to 90% for Eligible
           Bond Contracts and to 99% for Eligible Equity Index Contracts. However, the
           correlation coefficient for Eligible Interest Rate Contracts remains unchanged as
           compared to the level set in the Commitments of 21 November 2011, and therefore
           remains at the level of 85%.1207
   (1392) Second, as concerns the definition of eligible ITPs, the new proposal seeks to address
           the criticism expressed in the first market test where it was pointed out that non-
           regulated markets, such as MTFs, were excluded from the scope of eligible entrants.1208
           While there is no explicit provision including MTFs within the scope of eligible ITPs,
           the Commitments of 14 December 2011 no longer contain a requirement whereby an
           eligible ITP has to be bound by the same regulatory obligations as the Notifying
           Parties. As a result, the ITPA Commitment will be available to any market domiciled in
   1205
             See footnote 110 for definition of fungible contracts. Positions in contracts that are fungible can be
             netted against each other without resulting in any basis risk. For contracts to be fungible exchanges
             owning the contracts have to recognize that two contracts created by two different exchanges are the
             same contracts.
   1206
             This is in contrast with the ITPA Commitment which is market-wide, encompassing all eligible ITPs.
   1207
             The only change to the definition of eligible interest rate derivatives contract is in the formula for
             calculation of the relevant correlations which is not set in reference to "observed value of the respective
             underlying rate of the respective contract" that is the actual market rate and not a "fair value of the
             respective contract" as initially set in the commitments of 21 November 2011.
   1208
             Point 1(d) of the ITPA Commitment of 21 November 2011 contained the following definition of
             eligible ITP Markets: "any market domiciled in the EU and authorized to trade interest rate or equity
             index derivatives contracts, as applicable, by the competent supervisory authorities of a Member State
             of the European Union and bound by the same regulatory obligations as the applicable Parties'
             Markets under EU law as implemented in the Member States."
EN                                                           328                                                         EN

           the Union that is authorised to trade interest rate and equity index derivatives by the
           relevant supervisory authorities. However, the Commitments of 14 December 2011
           contain a new provision whereby the ITPA Committee will be responsible to determine
           whether an ITP applicant is suitable for concluding a Clearing Service Agreement
           (CSA) in light of its sufficient liquidity, transparency rules and market supervision
           arrangements.1209
   (1393) Third, the Commitments of 14 December 2011 bring a change to the composition of
           the ITPA Committee. Under the new set-up, the ITPA Committee would have eight
           members instead of four members provided for in the Commitments of 21 November
           2011. Four out of eight members would be employees of Eurex and four members
           would be independent of the merged entity. The new commitments introduce a function
           of a chair of the Committee which would be held by a Eurex member and would hold
           the tie-breaking vote.
   (1394) Finally, the Commitments of 14 December 2011 shorten the application procedure
           for admission to clear ITP contracts by 10 working days, provide for a possibility for
           ITPs to extend the duration of the CSA at their own discretion indefinitely, and improve
           the firewall mechanism by ring-fencing the employees handling ITPs data vis-à-vis the
           merged entity. In addition, the duration of the ITPA commitment as provided for in the
           Commitments of 14 December 2011 can be extended by the Commission for several
           two-year periods.1210
        13.2.2.3.NEW INTEREST RATE SOFTWARE LICENCE
   (1395) Finally, the Commitments of 14 December 2011 contain a new remedy in the area of
           interest rate derivatives, namely a commitment to grant a licence to Eurex’ interest rate
           trading software (hereinafter referred to as "the Licence Commitment"). Pursuant to this
           commitment, the merged entity would grant a licence to its interest rate trading
           software to independent third parties willing to trade interest rate contracts, including
           contracts identical to those traded by the merged entity. However, clearing functionality
           is explicitly excluded from the commitment, therefore these contracts would not be
           eligible for access to the merged entity's margin pool pursuant to the ITPA
           commitment.1211
   (1396) According to the Licence Commitment, the licence to Eurex interest rate trading
           software would be granted on a non-exclusive basis against a lump-sum or on a royalty
           bearing basis. The licence does not comprise the source code of the software and
           therefore the software maintenance and development services of the licensed software
           would be provided by the merged entity in accordance with a pre-agreed scheme.
   1209
              Point 1(d) of the ITPA Commitment of 14 December 21 November 2011 contained the following
             definition of eligible ITP Markets: " any market domiciled in the European Union and authorized to
             trade interest rate or equity index derivatives contracts, as applicable, in the European Union by the
             competent supervisory authorities of a Member State of the European Union and determined by the
             ITPA Committee to have in place sufficient liquidity, transparency rules, and market supervision
             arrangements that facilitate the necessary level of regulatory information sharing with the
             Clearinghouse and its supervisors so as to allow the Clearinghouse to evaluate the risks associated
             with its ITP Contracts".
   1210
             As opposed to one two-year period provided for in the commitments of 21 November 2011.
   1211
             Only interest rate contracts meeting the correlation thresholds would be eligible for ITPA.
EN                                                         329                                                      EN

       13.2.3. Notifying Parties' informal pledge to freeze trading and clearing fees for 3 years
   (1397) In addition to the formally submitted Commitments of 21 November 2011 and of 14
           December 2011, on 15 December 2011, the Notifying Parties, by way of letter,
           informally offered to state publicly, that "for a period of three years following the
           consummation of the merger, it [the merged entity] has no plans to raise its combined
           published standard trading and clearing fees for derivatives contracts traded on their
           European derivatives exchanges."1212 Any such plans would be "subject to change at
           any time due to market developments, legal or regulatory constraints or other
           circumstances".1213
     13.3. OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE COMMITMENTS OF 14 DECEMBER 2011
   (1398) The market test of the commitments package formally submitted on 14 December
           2011 was launched on the same day (the "second market test"). At the request of the
           Notifying Parties, the scope of the respondents to the second market test was enlarged
           to include a number of companies, principally active as issuers in cash markets, which
           the Notifying Parties considered as relevant to include for the purpose of gathering
           views of market participants on the viability, effectiveness and workability of the
           proposed commitments in the area of derivatives.1214
   (1399) As a result, over 150 questionnaires were sent to various categories of market
           participants, namely competitors, customers, post-trade services providers and financial
           regulators. Close to 100 respondents provided their replies to the second market test.1215
   (1400) The second market test sought to assess whether the changes brought about to the
           initial set of the Commitments of 21 November 2011 were such as to render the
           proposed merger compatible with the internal market. In particular, the Commission
           enquired whether the scope of the new set of Commitments of 14 December 2011 was
           sufficient to entirely remove all competition concerns resulting from the proposed
           merger, whether the commitments were viable and likely to be effective in practice and
           whether the commitments were likely to lead to a sufficient and timely entry that would
           restore competition likely to be lost as a result of the notified transaction in the
           derivatives markets concerned by this Decision.
   1212
            Deutsche Boerse, NYSE Euronext, Letter to Vice-President Almunia, 15 December 2011.
   1213
            Deutsche Boerse, NYSE Euronext, Letter to Vice-President Almunia, 15 December 2011.
   1214
            By an e-mail of 13 December 2011 NYX submitted a list of customers who should in its view be
            included in the market test. The list included 18 companies, namely [...]*. The Commission sent a
            questionnaire market testing the Commitments of 14 December 2011 to all of these market participants.
            11 companies replied to the questionnaire, only two of which filled the questionnaire. Nine of these
            companies replied that they are not in apposition to respond to the questionnaire due to the lack of
            knowledge of derivatives markets.
   1215
            More precisely, the Commission sent 161 questionnaires: 3 to competitors (16 replies); 106 to
            customers including the additional customers as specified in the Notifying Parties' e-mail of 13
            December 2011 (64 replies); 7 to regulators (7 replies); and 11 questionnaires to post trade services
            providers (4 replies).
EN                                                      330                                                       EN

       13.3.1. Results of the second market test
   (1401) As was the case for the first market test, the second market test was also overall
           negative. Despite the changes brought about to the initial package, a significant
           majority of market participants indicated that their views on the package remained
           substantially unchanged in light of the new proposal.1216
   (1402) Indeed, virtually all competitors1217 and a majority of customers1218 considered that
           the remedies package as designed in the Commitments of 14 December 2011 does not
           have the potential to create an effective and viable competitive force in the markets
           concerned by this Decision. This is because, according to the market participants, post-
          merger, the bulk of the liquidity in the derivatives contracts concerned would still be
          concentrated on the merged entity's venues, and the remedies package does not have the
          potential to alter this balance. Indeed, the lack of fungibility of contracts together with
          the limitations to the ITPA commitment and the dependence on the merged entity for
          the provision of critical services are all elements which would prevent a potential new
          competitor from achieving sufficient scale to be viable and to compete against the
          merged entity on a lasting basis.
   (1403) In the same vein, a majority of customers1219 and almost all competitors1220
          considered that the revised remedies package is insufficient to restore competition lost
          as a result of the notified transaction. Indeed, while the remedies proposal could under
          certain circumstances have the potential to be adequate in the area of European single
          stock equity derivatives, the current competitive constraint exerted by the Notifying
          Parties on each other across the whole scope of derivatives products concerned would
          not be restored as a result of these commitments. In sum, the market test revealed that
          market participants consider the overall changes to the initial package to be limited and
          insufficient to resolve the competition concerns stemming from the notified transaction.
   1216
            See replies to question 4 and 5 of questionnaires Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
            2011 - Customers to customers and Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
            Competitors to competitors: competitors (with the only exception of Börse Düsseldorf [...]*) and the
            significant majority (with the exception of 3) indicated that they maintained their view on the overall
            package. However, as concerns the Divestment business, a number of respondents indicated that their
            views with respect to the viability of the Divestment business in the area of single stock equity
            derivatives changed in view of the new proposal.
   1217
            10 out of 11 competitors that replied to question 6 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered
            on 14 December 2011 – Competitors.
   1218
            24 out of 44 customers that replied to question 6 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered
            on 14 December 2011 - Customers .
   1219
            Only 8 customers out of 36 that replied to question 7 of questionnaire Market test of commitments
            offered on 14 December 2011 - Customers indicated that the scope of the revised remedies package
            would be sufficient to restore the current competition between Liffe and Eurex in the markets concerned
            by the present transaction, while 24 expressed negative views in this regard. 4 customers indicated that
            the restoration of competition would depend on a number of factors, including, amongst other things,
            the identity of the purchaser of the Divestment Business.
   1220
            10 out of 12 competitors that replied to question 7 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered
            on 14 December 2011 – Competitors.
EN                                                         331                                                       EN

        13.3.1.1.SCOPE OF THE COMMITMENTS OF 14 DECEMBER 2011
                          13.3.1.1.1. Divestment Commitment
   (1404) As concerns the new structure of the Divestment commitment whereby, subject to
           the relevant regulatory approvals, all NYX' contracts would be divested, both customers
           and competitors indicated that this constituted an improvement to the previous version
           of the package, thereby enhancing its chances to be competitive. However, market
           participants also pointed to the substantial execution risk associated with the proposed
           alternative scope of the Divestment business. This is because the uncertainties related to
           obtaining the regulatory approvals may put in doubt the very feasibility of this new
           proposal. In this context, BATS/Chi-X Europe noted that "Experience shows gaining
           regulatory approval for such a project can take many months, carries execution risk,
           additional costs and the possibility of business migrating to other venues."1221 From the
           customer side, Bank of New York Mellon expressed the view that "the commitment
           structure presents a degree of uncertainty that may well decrease the number of
           potentially interested parties."1222 Exane Group specified that "[t]he divested business
           is already quite weak compared to Eurex. Its position would be even weaker so if it
           looses one country and gets Eurex weaker operation instead."1223
   (1405) The Commission also market tested the new offer to grant access to the merged
           entity's margin pool to the Purchaser of the Divestment business for divested single
           equity contracts as well as any single equity contracts traded on the Purchaser's
           platform. While customers generally welcomed this offer which, provided a Purchaser
           is found, would enhance the competitiveness of its offering, they also expressed a view
           that the lack of fungibility is a serious shortcoming which may impact the real value of
           such access.1224 In this respect, Citigroup noted that "Margin offsets will potentially
           assist, however the cost of funding is based on risk models. Risk models analysis net
           position exposures. Without true netting, risk/funding will remain the same. Unlikely to
           create a viable alternative to trading without support for cross platform netting."1225
           Similarly, BNP Paribas expressed the view that "This proposal is useful but stops short
           of offering full fungibility as the OCC in the US"1226 while Nomura explained that "The
           access offered is somehwat helpful but is unlikely to create a viable alternative. The
   1221
             BATS/Chi-X Europe, response to question 11 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on
             14 December 2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1222
             Bank of New York Mellon, response to question 11 of questionnaire Market test of commitments
             offered on 14 December 2011 – Customers [...]*. See also the reply to the same question by [...]*.
   1223
             Exane Group, response to question 11 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
             December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1224
             See replies to question 12 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
             Customers: 27 out of 34 customers which replied to this question stressed the importance of fungibility
             and netting opportunities as decisive factors to create a viable trading venue competing with the merged
             entity, while only 6 considered the offer of cross-margining sufficient. Tibra Trading, for example,
             considered that "Cross-margning is beneficial, but viability and competitiveness would also depend on
             fees and systems" (response to question 12 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
             December 2011 – Customers […]*.)
   1225
             Citigroup, response to question 12 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
             December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1226
             BNP Paribas, response to question 12 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
             December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
EN                                                          332                                                       EN

         lack of netting of divested contracts and the merged entity's contracts implies the
         clearing solution is not intended to offer open access to clearing in the fullest sense as
         end users will be obliged to treat the contracts as separate contracts for clearing
         purposes and the positons will need to be managed separately for delivery/expiry
         purposes."1227
   (1406) As a result, many customers indicated that under these circumstances, the lack of
         fungibility between the Purchaser's contracts and the contracts of the merged entity may
         affect their incentives to trade these contracts with the Purchaser of the Divestment
         business as compared to the merged entity.1228 For instance, Susquehanna International
         Group Limited indicated that "We believe that that the lack of such cross product
         netting greatly weakens the potential to create a viable alternative in trading of
         European single stock equity derivatives. The lack of netting increases the costs of
         doing business and would tend to lead to all trading being concentrated in single venue
         where the positions in instruments are nettable."1229 Similarly, Citigroup stated that it
         would have "Very little incentive which will depend on appetite of underlying client.
         Without fungibility of netting – no incentive"1230 while Exane said that "In our view this
         would not be an efficient incentive to trade European single equity derivatives contracts
         with the new Purchaser."1231Similarly, customers also indicated that their incentives to
         trade on the Purchaser's platform would also depend on other factors such as the
         liquidity of these contracts on the Purchaser's platform or the fees charged by the
         Purchaser.1232
   (1407) In addition, the market test provided indications that for viability reasons, the scope
         may not be sufficient.1233In particular, this would be due to the fact that the Divestment
   1227
           Nomura international, response to question 12 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on
           14 December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1228
           See replies to question 13 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011
           - Customers: 19 out of 28 customers indicated that the lack of fungibility would affect their incentives
           to trade European single equity derivatives contracts with the new Purchaser, while only 2 specified that
           it would not have any impact. For the remaining 9 customers, see below in the text and footnote 1232 of
           this Decision.
   1229
           Susquehanna International Group Limited, response to question 12 of questionnaire Market test of
           commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – Customers [...]*. In the same vein, the response to the
           same question by [another customer]*: "We believe that no netting could create an "all or nothing"
           situation, where players decide to take all their positions down to one single venue where they can
           maximize their cash usage" [...]*.
   1230
           Citigroup, response to question 13 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
           December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1231
           Exane Group, response to question 13 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
           December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1232
           9 out of 28 customers who replied to question 13, customers of questionnaire Market test of
           commitments offered on 14 December 2011 - Customers.
   1233
           See responses to question 10 of both questionnaires Market test of commitments offered on 14
           December 2011 - Customers and Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
           Competitors. 19 out of 31 customers and 6 out of 9 competitors did not consider that the proposed
           revised Divestment business had sufficient scale and scope to be operated as a viable stand-alone
           business competing with the merged entity in the area of European single stock equity derivatives,
           whilst 7 customers and 1 competitor had a positive view in this regard. The remaining 5 customers and
           2 competitors that replied to this question indicated that the viability of the Divestment business would
           depend on several factors, including the rules and the costs of access and the Purchaser's identity (for
EN                                                        333                                                        EN

         business was limited to single stock equity derivatives. In this respect, to be viable, the
         Divestment business would need to include the underlying equity instruments, some of
         the most attractive stock future and option products and benchmark index products.
         Such broader scope of the Divestment business would, according to the market test,
         increase cross-margining opportunities and compensate internal costs associated with
         the transfer of the business to the Purchaser. In this respect ICE noted that "The
         'improved' divestment package "still amounts to only 15 per [cent]* of the [average]*
         daily volume of all of Liffe's derivatives products".1234
                        13.3.1.1.2. ITPA Commitment
   (1408) As concerns the scope of the ITPA Commitment as specified in the Commitments of
         14 December 2011, the second market test indicated that changes to the correlation
         coefficients were rather cosmetic as the fundamental limitation whereby contracts
         directly competing with those of the merged entity's existing benchmark products are
         excluded from the scope of the ITPA Commitment remained unchanged.
   (1409) As such, notwithstanding these changes, all competitors1235 and the majority of
         customers1236 indicated that the new levels of the correlation coefficients would not
         allow the merged entity's competitors to introduce contracts which would compete with
         the merged entity's current/existing derivatives. Indeed, the market test revealed that de
         facto, there are no contracts that customers would like to trade which would meet the
         eligibility criteria as set in the proposed ITPA Commitment.1237
           the customers), and the lack of the underlying equity instruments and the operation costs (for the
           competitors).
   1234
           ICE, response to market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1235
           See replies to question 24 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
           Competitors.
   1236
           See replies to question 19 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
           Customers: 18 out of 31 customers indicated that they do not believe that the new correlation levels
           would allow the merged entity's competitors to introduce contracts which will compete with the merged
           entity's current/existing European interest rate derivative and European Equity Index derivative
           contracts, whilst 9 of them expressed the opposite view.
   1237
           See replies to question 24 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
           Customers and to question 26 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 - Competitors.
           As regards customers, the question addressed by the Commission read: "In your view, are there any
           interest rate or bond contracts for which you as a customer would like to have alternative trading
           options but which would not be covered by the proposed ITPA Commitments?" It required a YES/NO
           response together with an explanation. 3 out of 34 respondents indicated that their decision to trade
           depended on their client's choice, while amongst the rest, 14 replied yes and 17 replied no. Nonetheless,
           5 out of these 17 customers appeared to have misunderstood the question in responding to the multiple
           choice part of the question and indicated no as answer, but then explained that they were not looking at
           trading opportunities in contracts other than existing ones (one of them, Unicredit Bank, indicated that
           "[i]t should be avoided that there is only one institution that can fix prices and conditions to the
           products as a monopolist. So, maybe in case of a 85% max correlation is not sufficient to allow
           competition, the factor should be revisable" […]*). Therefore, it was generally confirmed that there was
           no significant interest for contracts other than existing ones (or which are not highly correlated with
           already existing contracts) and therefore excluded from the ITPA Commitment.
EN                                                       334                                                         EN

   (1410) The second market test also confirmed the concerns as regards the appropriateness of
         correlation as a tool to determine eligible contracts and the conflicts which may arise in
         this respect given that correlation tends to evolve over time.1238
   (1411) As regards the scope of eligible ITPs, the second market test provided indications
         that the revised definition, despite providing somewhat more clarity, is still not
         sufficiently objective and clear-cut to determine those entities entitled to apply for the
         ITPA. Indeed, all competitors expressed concerns in relation to the definition of eligible
         ITPs as specified in the Commitments of 14 December 2011:1239 According to the
         competitors, although MTFs would seem to be included in the scope of eligible ITPs,
         the definition contains new vague terms in relation to the sufficient liquidity etc.
         leaving a scope for interpretation to the ITPA Committee. This lack of clarity and the
         discretion of the ITPA Committee in the determination of eligible ITPs could
         potentially narrow the range of eligible applicants in practice. In this regard,
         BATS/Chi-X Europe, whilst considering that the revised definition of eligible ITPs
         does now include MTFs having appropriate regulatory approvals, noted that "the
         criteria also stipulates that the ITPA Committee will determine (at its sole discretion
         and among other things) whether or not the platform has in place "sufficient liquidity".
         Given any new contract will not have any liquidity until listed for trading this criteria
         presents significant execution risk and should be removed. The other criteria like
         transparent rules and suitable market supervision arrangements also leave room for
         interpretation and we would argue that if we have satisfied our regulator on these
         matters this should be sufficient for the ITPA Committee."1240 In the same vein, CME
         observed that "it appears the eligibility requirements as written may create a narrow
         group of potential competitors. Further, the addition of an eligibility requirement
         allowing the ITPA committee to determine whether a market has sufficient liquidity to
         be an eligible ITP could prevent start-ups from gaining ITP status,"1241 whilst ICAP
         indicated that "it would appear the criteria are subjective - what exactly constitutes
         sufficient liquidity, whose transparency rules and will they consider existing waivers
         and thresholds, market supervision for which kinds of entities (only RMs, or MTFs,
         OTFs and SIs as well?)."1242 As a result, competitors when asked to asses whether their
         company would meet the test for an eligible ITP as specified in the revised
         commitments were not able to reply with certainty.1243 Moreover, it was pointed out
   1238
           See replies to question 23 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
           Customers, where while 12 out of 23 respondents indicated that this tool would be appropriate, 11
           expressed concerns.
   1239
           See replies to question 27 of questionnaire to Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 - Competitors.
   1240
           BATS/Chi-X Europe, response to question 27 of questionnaire to Market test of commitments offered
           on 14 December 2011 - Competitors [...]*.
   1241
           CME, response to question 27 of questionnaire to Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 - Competitors [...]*.
   1242
           ICAP, response to question 28 of questionnaire to Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 - Competitors [...]*. See also Nasdaq OMX, response to question 27: " As to the wording, the
           discretion to be vested with the DB/NYX-dependent ITPA Committee to determine if the ITP has
           “sufficient liquidity, transparency rules, and market supervision arrangements that facilitate the
           necessary level of regulatory information sharing with the Clearinghouse and its supervisors so as to
           allow the Clearinghouse to evaluate the risks associated with its ITP Contracts” contributes to the
           uncertainty as to who qualifies as an ITP" [...]*.
   1243
           See replies to question 28 of questionnaire to Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 - Competitors. See, e.g., Nasdaq OMX, replying that " it appears that NASDAQ OMX would
EN                                                        335                                                    EN

         that the definition of eligible ITPs would exclude from the scope of the ITPA
         Commitment players operating markets not domiciled in the EU.1244
   (1412) Similar concerns in relation to the definition of ITP as provided for in the
         Commitments of 14 December 2011 were expressed by a majority of customers.1245
                         13.3.1.1.3. Licence commitment
   (1413) As concerns the Licence commitment, the second market test indicated that this
         commitment would not be sufficient to restore competition in the trading of existing
         interest rate derivatives. Indeed, the substantial majority of both customers and
         competitors indicated that the licence to interest rate derivatives software is not an asset
         necessary to effectively compete in the area of European interest rate derivatives under
         current market conditions as most of them already have access to such software.1246
         1247
              For instance ICE noted that "many of the potential competitors in interest rate
         derivatives already possesse the necessary software capability, or could develop it
         internally. Alternatively, the software could be obtained from third party software
         developers."1248
   (1414) It follows that the trading software is not an actual barrier to entry into market for
         trading and clearing of benchmark European interest rate derivatives. In this regard,
         ICAP indicated that "it is not the platform itself, but client access and integration to the
         trading platform that would be the most difficult hurdle to overcome if such entry were
         attempted. As such, the software license is immaterial and will not enable new entry in
         a competitive manner. In this respect, it should be recalled that the current remedies do
         not in fact provide for user access to execution and clearing in any meaningful way and
         so any licence to use execution software would be at best a small concession. In fact, it
         is telling in this respect to note that licensing of trading software already is offered by a
           qualify. However, as stated above, the wording of the definition of “ITP market” create a large amount
           of uncertainty as to who qualifies as an ITP and we can therefore not be sure" [...]*, whilst LSE's reply
           reads: "It is assumed that the Parties’ intention is to allow MTFs to be eligible for ITPA. If so, then it is
           possible that Turquoise could meet the test. However, as noted in our response to Question 27, above,
           it would be helpful to clarify this point" [...]*.
   1244
           In this regard Nasdaq OMX in its response to question 27 of questionnaire to Market test of
           commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – Competitors [...]*, noted: "As a general remark it is
           somewhat surprising to note that the parties so bluntly disqualify any market domiciled outside the EU
           from the ITP, as they have argued throughout the merger review process for a global geographic scope
           of the market and further pointed to CME as the main potential competitor."
   1245
           See replies to question 25 of questionnaire to Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 - Customers, where while 12 out of 25 respondents indicated that the definition of eligible ITP
           would be sufficiently clear, the remaining indicated that it is not clear and/or it leaves room for
           interpretation to the ITPA Committee.
   1246
           See responses to questions 30 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 - Customers and 41 of questionnaire to Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011
           - Competitors: 25 out of 32 respondents among the customers and 9 out of 11 competitors indicated that
           licence to interest rate derivatives software is not necessary to compete, whilst only 7 customers and 2
           competitors express a positive view in this regard.
   1247
           7 out of 10 respondents to question 39 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
           December 2011 - Competitors indicated that they own a software or a licence to third-party software
           allowing it to offer trading of interest rate derivatives.
   1248
           ICE, response to the questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 –
           Competitors [...]*.
EN                                                           336                                                         EN

           number of exchanges, including the parties."1249 Similarly, [one large customer]* noted
           that "[o]btaining critical mass of liquidity and efficient clearing margin relationships
           are crucial for competing in the execution space. Software is much less of a
           barrier."1250Finally, ICE noted that while "this appears to be the key 'improvement' in
           respect of interest rate derivatives […] in practice this concession is immaterial."1251
   (1415) In addition, even if the software were to be an asset having the potential to help new
           entrants to compete in the area of European interest rate derivatives, the proposed
           Licence commitment would be insufficient. This is because it does not include clearing
           functionality, network management or distribution link, nor the relevant source code.
           As a result, the licensee would be dependent on the merged entity for support and
           system development.
        13.3.1.2.VIABILITY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE COMMITMENTS OF 14 DECEMBER 2011
                           13.3.1.2.1. Divestment Commitment
   (1416) While some respondents indicated that the Divestment business may be viable, given
           the network nature of the industry, various market participants expressed doubts about
           the chances that the isolated divestment business would succeed as a viable business
           under the market conditions as resulting from the merger, in particular facing the
           merged entity with its pricing power and a wide portfolio of contracts.1252 In this regard,
           from the customer side, BGC indicated that "[n]ormally, stand alone businesses have
           limited chances for success, and the global trend toward consolidation in both the
           exchange and banking spheres (an element of the logic behind the proposed merger)
           means that a stand alone business will not necessarily be the end result of the auction
           of Divested Businesses."1253 In the same vein, ICAP indicated that "it is difficult to see
           that this business could survive when not offering cross-margining against the
           respective Index futures (which the parties are not divesting)" and also that "[t]he cost
           to the purchaser of hosting the divested contracts (without the successful home markets
           and index businesses to defray these costs) is likely to outweigh the revenue income
           achieved from them."1254
   1249
             ICAP, response to question 41 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
             2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1250
             [...]*, response to question 30 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
             2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1251
             ICE, response to the questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 –
             Competitors [...]*.
   1252
             See replies to question 10 of both questionnaires Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
             2011 - Competitors and Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 - Customers: an
             overall analysis of the replies to this question can be found at footnote 1233of this Decision. See for
             instance BCG (Cantor Fitzgerald Group)'s response to question 10 of Market test of commitments
             offered on 14 December 2011 - Customers [...]* stating that: "There is a remote possibility that the
             Purchaser may operate a viable stand alone single stock equity derivative business to compete with the
             merged entity. However, as stated above, the strong pricing power of the dominant merged entity
             combined with other structural factors mentioned in question 9 make this an unlikely event."
   1253
             BGC (Cantor Fitzgerald Group), reply to question 10 of questionnaire Market test of commitments
             offered on 14 December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1254
             ICAP, reply to question 10 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011
             – Customers [...]*.
EN                                                          337                                                      EN

   (1417) To emphasise the weakness of the isolated business limited to single stock
         derivatives, one customer indicated that the break-up of NYX "would also be the end of
         the complementary strength and network efficiencies of NYX home markets' as they will
         no longer offer cash equity and index, interest rate and equity derivatives products at
         one exchange group."1255
   (1418) In this context, it was also pointed that the divested single equity contracts are so-
         called "niche products" and that high volume derivatives will remain with the merged
         entity.1256 Indeed, ICAP noted that "The divested contracts represent only
         approximately 15% of Liffe’s revenue (and an estimated less than 2% of the combined
         DB/NYSE revenue): their commercial viability is therefore limited."1257
   (1419) In addition, as pointed out in the first market test, the incentives of customers to
         transfer their business to the potential Purchaser may be limited which may lead to a
         quick erosion of the divested open interest. This is because the migration of contracts is
         associated with a number of various costs that customers would have to bear. In this
         context, one of the Notifying Parties' customers, ICAP, noted that "The client cost and
         inconvenience in migrating the contracts (across front, middle and back office) is likely
         to outweigh the additional utility they would get from migration, hence it is unlikely
         that the clients would want to move their positions. This would be true despite the
         transitional services offered by the parties in the current remedies as there would still
         be plenty of client costs (network/connectivity and margining modules and
         management) considerations even within this (temporary and short-term)
         ‘solution’."1258 Similarly, another customer explained that "setting up such a business is
         not an easy process and clients wil [sic] remain sceptical of the new entity".1259
   (1420) Some customers reiterated the functional dependency between single equity
         derivatives and equity index derivatives. In this respect, it was noted that "Any entrant
         would need to offer an index contract along with the underlyings and the index would
         need to be active and used as a benchmark by investors and traders."1260 This view was
         also expressed by other market participants. TOM well summarised the competitors'
         general view, indicating that "[f]or any market operator who seeks to succeed in the
         derivatives trading landscape indices products are vital to achieve and maintain a
   1255
           Anonymous, submission concerning the Commitments offered on 14 December 2011, [...]*.
   1256
           See responses to question 10 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 – Customers.
   1257
           ICAP, response to response to question 10 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
           December 2011 – Customers [...]*, which also indicated that it could be the case that "the contracts
           NYSE-DB are proposing to divest of are the weaker parts of their portfolio. The divestiture probably
           saves them the license fees and costs of winding down the Bclear platform and certain of the divested
           contracts (which they may have closed down anyway in order to realize the synergies of the proposed
           merger). Accordingly, despite the revisions to the remedy, this could still be construed as merely an
           opportunistic ‘concession’."
   1258
           ICAP, response to question 10 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1259
           ICF Kursmakler, response to question 10 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
           December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1260
           Nomura, response to question 10 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 – Customers [...]*.
EN                                                     338                                                       EN

         viable derivatives trading business."1261 In the same vein, LCH.Clearnet indicated that
         the Divestment business is not viable "as it does not include NYX’s index portfolio. Any
         viable competing business would have to be able to provide trading services in these
         same products to be attractive to market users."1262
   (1421) In addition, as mentioned above, the viability of the Divestment business, and
         therefore the effectiveness of the remedy, would also be undermined by the lack of
         fungibility (between Purchaser's single equity derivatives and the equivalent contracts
         in the merged entity's margin pool), which would disincentivise customers from
         migrating their position towards the Purchaser and would rather lead them to move
         their trades on trading venues offering greater fungibility and netting opportunities. In
         this regard, the view of Bank of New York Mellon well summarises the results of the
         market test on this point when it indicated that "even if the divested assets theoretically
         could be operated as a viable business, it still remains the case that the proposed
         commitments do not in any way preclude the merging parties (and in particular Eurex
         and Eurex Clearing) from continuing to operate a competing business (i.e. continue to
         trade the same contracts). In the absence of such a non-compete restriction that
         applies for at least three years from the date of the effective transfer of the relevant
         contracts, it is highly doubtful that a purchaser of the Divestment Business will be able
         to attract and retain sufficient liquidity in the single equity options contracts that it will
         be trading.1263
                        13.3.1.2.2. ITPA Commitment
   (1422) The second market test highlighted that all competitors and the significant majority
         of customers did not consider that the revised access remedy would have an effect
         equivalent to a divestiture of one of the Notifying Parties' businesses and thus would
         not be effective in restoring competition in the area of European interest rate and equity
         index derivatives.1264
   (1423) Indeed, despite the amendments to the initial ITPA Commitment, the proposed
         access remedy still presents a number of shortcomings affecting its effectiveness in
         practice. These shortcomings principally relate to the scope of eligible contracts limited
         by the correlation coefficient, the innovation period and the cost of access, as well as
   1261
           TOM, response to question 6 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 - Competitors [...]*, to which it referred in the reply to question 10.
   1262
           LCH.Clearnet, response to question 10 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
           December 2011 – Post-trade service providers [...]*.
   1263
           Bank of New York Mellon, response to question 10 of questionnaire Market test of commitments
           offered on 14 December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1264
           See replies to question 21 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
           Competitors (with the exception of Wiener Boerse [...]*) and to question 16 of questionnaire Market
           test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 - Customers to competitors (28 out of 39
           respondents expressed this view). It is worth noting that out of the 3 responses to this question provided
           by the additional customers indicated by the Notifying Parties (question 25 of questionnaire Market test
           of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – New Customers ), only 1 respondent indicated that the
           ITPA would be equivalent to a divestment, while another customer indicated that, despite the fact that
           the ITPA could be equivalent to a divestment, "as the environment is changing the same time, one
           cannot restore pre-merger levels" (UCB, response to question 25 of questionnaire Market test of
           commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – New Customers [...]*.)
EN                                                        339                                                         EN

         the fact that the independence of the ITPA Committee is not fully acknowledged by
         market participants.1265In this respect, Landesbank Berlin indicated, that "[f]or a
         competitor it is easier to start with an established product as with a new innovation.
         Therefore a divestment will always have a greater impact to restore competion [sic]
         than the ITPA."1266 In the same vein, BATS/Chi-X Europe "does not think access to the
         margin pool will have an effect equivalent to a divesture for the simple reason that the
         correlation criteria precludes any contracts entering Eurex clearing that could compete
         with the combined entity's franchise. This is an overriding issue even if all the other
         concerns related to accessing Eurex clearing, conflicts of interests, competing
         priorities, costs, governance etc. can be met."1267 Similarly, ICAP noted that "The scope
         of the access to the merged entity’s margin pool is so limited and the conditions under
         which access may be obtained so punitive (even under the amended access remedy) that
         no commercial enterprise would want to approach the merged DB-NYSE entity to
         negotiate access to clearing. The composition of the ITPA committee also amplifies the
         unworkability of the remedy given that access to clearing is entirely within the control
         of the merging party. And finally, despite the barriers, should success be achieved by a
         3rd party in any area, as clearer to the solution the merged entity will share in the
         rewards. NYSE-DB has devised a no lose ‘concession’ in this regard."1268
   (1424) According to market participants, the limitation of the scope of the ITPA
         Commitment to new contracts fundamentally affects the practical impact that such a
         remedy may have in the market. Indeed, the actual scope of the products that would be
         eligible for access pursuant to this commitment and are likely to have success is in
         reality very small. This is because there is little demand for such contracts in the
         market. In this respect, ICE explained that "[t]ypically, investors require derivatives
         contracts which have little or no basis risk between the underlying instrument and the
         derivatives [contracts]*. In other words, it would be very hard to create a product
         useful for investing or hedging in European [interest]* rate or bond markets that is not
         going to be very similar to an existing product."1269
   (1425) It follows that market participants considered that the ITPA Commitment is unlikely
         to recreate effective competition in the markets by allowing an effective entry. 1270 In
         this regard, Exane indicated that "the new entity would be seen as a weaker one with
   1265
          In this regard, see replies to question 28 of Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 –
          Customers and 37 of Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – Competitors.
   1266
          Landesbank Berlin, response to question 16 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
          December 2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1267
          BATS/Chi-X Europe, response to question 21 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on
          14 December 2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1268
          ICAP, response to question 16 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
          2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1269
          ICE, response to questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 –
          Competitors. [...]*.
   1270
          See responses to questions 26 and 27 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14
          December 2011 - Customers: 19 out of 21 customers and 17 out 21 respondents indicated that the
          access remedy as designed in the ITPA Commitment would not be effective in practice so that effective
          competition to the merged entity will arise in the area of, respectively, European interest rate derivatives
          and European equity index derivatives. On the competitor side, see replies to questions 35 and 36 of
          questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – Competitors: 5 out of 6 and
          8 out of 9 competitors indicated that the ITPA Commitment will not be effective in practice to restore
          competition in the area of, respectively, European interest rate and European equity index derivatives.
EN                                                       340                                                           EN

         little prospect, dependent on the merged entity through the ITPA and vulnerable to
         what happens next. As commitment to a platform necessitate important investment, it
         might be abandoned by clients."1271Similarly, ICE noted that "the ITPA Commitment
         will not, in practice, stimulate sufficient additional competitive pressure on the parties
         to compensate for [the ]* adverse impact on competition."1272
   (1426) In addition, some market participants pointed to the fact that the proposed access
         commitment may have an opposite effect to the one it is trying to achieve and instead of
         fostering competition, it may solidify the merged entity's dominant position and make
         future entry even less likely. In this respect Nomura indicated that "[t]he ITPA
         commitment can be viewed as an attempt to create a clearing monopoly. Any
         meaningful competition driven by margin efficiency will mean third party trading
         venues are forced to use the merged firm's clearing house. Further the merged firm
         does not permit its contracts to be cleared elsewhere. Accordingly the merger skews
         the market to creating a clearing monopoly whilst prohibiting other vertical silos
         (trading venues combined with clearing house) or stand alone clearing house from
         offering similar services and hence competing with the merged firm."1273
   (1427) Finally, some respondents to the market test expressed concerns about the
         complexity of the proposed ITPA Commitment and its ability to be effectively
         implemented. This is because the proposal raises a range of complicated issues which
         have the capability to undermine the effectivness of the proposed commitment. In this
         respect, ICE noted that "in particular, the definitions of Eligible Interest Rate and
         Eligible Bond Contracts provided in the revised commitments are complex and appear
         somewhat arbitrary, and may not be sufficiently clear to determine, in advance of any
         request for access, which interest rate derivatives [contracts]* are eligible for access.
         Moreover, the correlation[']* calculations depend heavily on data created and analyses
         conducted by DB/NYX, raising issues as to the objectivity of any assessment and
         complicating any possible third party verification."1274
                        13.3.1.2.3. Licence commitment
   (1428) According to the second market test, the Licence commitment is unlikely to be
         effective in practice as it has little relevance for the Notifying Parties' competitors who
         in most cases already own or licence such software. While some competitors indicated
         that in theory, the Licence Commitment could lower the barriers to entry, any such
         lowering would not be material, as there are other factors more relevant and compelling
         for effective entry.1275
   1271
           Exane, response to question 16 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1272
           ICE, response to questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 –
           Competitors [...]*.
   1273
           Nomura, response to question 16 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 – Customers [...]*.
   1274
           ICE, response to the questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 –
           Competitors [...]*.
   1275
           See replies to question 43 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
           Competitors.
EN                                                      341                                                     EN

        13.3.1.3.ATTRACTIVENESS           OF THE COMMITMENTS OF              14 DECEMBER 2011         FOR NEW
                    ENTRANTS
   (1429) The second market test aimed at verifying whether the new set of commitments was
           altogether sufficiently attractive for market participants so that an effective entry by a
           player able to discipline the merged entity post-merger was likely to occur.
                           13.3.1.3.1. Divestment Commitment
   (1430) At the State of Play meeting of 9 December 2012, the Notifying Parties indicated to
           the Commission that they had been in contact with several potential Purchasers for the
           Divestment Business, and indicated that three of them, namely [Competitor 1]*,
           [Competitor 2]*, and [Competitor 3]*, had shown interest in the Divestment business as
           offered in the Commitments of 21 November 2011. Nonetheless, only [Competitor
           1]*indicated its conditional interest in its reply to the first market test.1276 Therefore, the
           Commission sought to verify this interest with the other third parties specified by the
           Notifying Parties. To this end, on 14 December 2011 the Commission held conference
           calls with [Competitor 2]* and [Competitor 3]* respectively to clarify their position as
           regard their possible interest in purchasing the Divestment business.1277
   (1431) In this regard, [Competitor 2]*1278 indicated that "the divestment business in its form
           as described in the commitments of 17 November 2011 would not be viable and hence
           [Competitor 2]* would not be interested in acquiring it."1279 Similarly, [Competitor 3]*
           [...]*1280.
   (1432) The second market test generally confirmed that the attractiveness of the Divestment
           business was doubtful and in all cases conditional upon a certain number of additional
           elements. With the only exception of [Competitor 2]*,1281 no competitor expressed
           interest in purchasing the business.1282 Even the two market participants who indicated
           to be potentially interested in the first market test now indicated that they would not be
           interested. More concretely, [Competitor 1]*indicated that it would not be interested in
           purchasing the Divestment business as it believed that it would not be able to sustain
           competition with the merged entity which would be in a position to fully leverage its
           market power and drive out the new Purchaser of the market.1283 Similarly, [Competitor
           4]* indicated that it would not be interested because "the cost-income relation would
           not be favorable (sic)".1284As concerns [Competitor 2]*, its interest would be
   1276
             [...]*,response to question 25 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 17 November
             2011 – Competitors[...]*.
   1277
             [...]*.
   1278
             [...]*.
   1279
             Agreed minutes of the conference call with [...]*of 14 December 2011 [...]*.
   1280
             Agreed minutes of the conference call with [...]*of 14 December 2011 [...]*.
   1281
             [...]*.
   1282
             See replies to question 12 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 –
             Competitors. [...]*.
   1283
             [...]*, response to question 12 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
             2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1284
             [...]*, response to question 12 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
             2011 – Competitors [...]*.
EN                                                        342                                                     EN

         conditional on the valuation of the business in view of its final scope and execution
         risk.1285
   (1433) On 11 January 2012, the Notifying Parties transmitted to the Commission a letter
         from [Competitor 5]*, whereby the latter expressed its non-binding interest in acquiring
         the Divestment business [...]*.
                        13.3.1.3.2. ITPA Commitment
   (1434) Similarly to the first market test, the second market test did not reveal any interest
         from a competitor in applying for access to the merged entity's margin pool pursuant to
         the ITPA commitment.1286
   (1435) This is because, according to competitors in general, the commercial attractiveness of
         the ITPA Commitment is hindered by the numerous conditions to which the access is
         subject. This makes its real value proposition uninteresting in particular in view of the
         fact that applying for access would require the applicant to clear its contracts at
         different clearing-houses which would amount to splitting the margin pools.
   (1436) For example, BATS/Chi-X Europe specified that it would not apply for access as
         "the products we would want to trade and clear through Eurex clearing would be
         ineligible under the current access criteria,"1287 whilst TOM indicated that "Trading
         derivatives on several markets cleared by the same CCP would allow real competition.
         Access to the merged entity’s margin pool is only interesting if this implies access to
         their open interest too. Secondly, costs for using these services are unclear which will
         determine trading venues’ general interest."1288In addition, ICE pointed out that the
         ITPA Commitment was of no practical use for full-service exchanges (such as itself)
         that operate a fully integrated model as the main aspect of their value proposition.
         Indeed, these providers would not be in a position to deliver "optimal customer solution
         (including innovating and launching of new products)" while ensuring that "they are
         capable of effectively discharging their clearing risk management and market
         regulation responsabilities" in application of this commitment.1289
   (1437) As concerns the market participants that currently own and operate their own
         clearing-house, namely CME and Nasdaq OMX, they would not be interested in such
         access [...]* pursuant to the ITPA commitment [...]*.
                        13.3.1.3.3. Licence commitment
   (1438) In light of its limited commercial value no market participant expressed an interest in
         purchasing the licence to Eurex interest rate derivatives trading software as specified in
   1285
           Agreed minutes of a teleconference with [...]*.
   1286
           See replies to question 32 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 -
           Competitors.
   1287
           BATS/Chi-X Europe, response to question 32 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on
           14 December 2011 – Competitors [...]*
   1288
           TOM, response to question 32 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December
           2011 – Competitors [...]*.
   1289
           ICE, response to the Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – Competitors [...]*.
EN                                                       343                                                    EN

           the commitments of 14 December 2014.1290 Indeed, the majority of competitors
           indicated that they already had their own software or a licence to third-party
           software.1291
       13.3.2. Commission's assessment of the Commitments of 14 December 2011
   (1439) The Commission analysed the suitability of the Commitments of 14 December 2011
           to remedy the entirety of the competition concerns identified in the SO and this
           Decision. To this end the Commission assessed, on the basis of all available evidence,
           including the results of the market test, whether the scope of the proposed commitments
           is sufficient in view of the competition concerns identified (Section 13.3.2.1), whether
           the proposed commitments are workable in practice and are suitable to remedy
           competition concerns in this case (Section 13.3.2.2), whether they can be effectively
           implemented and monitored (Section 13.3.3.4) and whether the proposed commitments
           would likely lead to a viable entry restoring the competition currently existing between
           Eurex and Liffe in the area of European financial derivatives, namely European single
           stock equity and equity index derivatives and European interest rate derivatives (short-
           term and long-term) (Section 13.3.3.3).
   (1440) From the outset, it should be noted that although the Commitments of 14 December
           2011 brought about certain improvements to the initial package, in particular in the area
           of the Divestment business, these improvements are not of a nature to render the
           notified transaction compatible with the internal market as they are not sufficient to
           eliminate completely all the competition concerns identified in the SO and this
           Decision.
        13.3.2.1.THE COMMITMENTS OF 14 DECEMBER 2011 ARE INSUFFICIENT IN SCOPE
   (1441) According to the Remedies Notice, "The commitments have to eliminate the
           competition concerns entirely and have to be comprehensive and effective from all
           points of view."1292
   (1442) To recall, in the SO and this Decision, the Commission identified a significant
           impediment of effective competition stemming from the proposed merger as a result of
           the elimination of actual and potential competition in the area of existing and new
           European single stock equity derivatives and European interest rate derivatives (short-
           term and long-term) products,1293 the elimination of competition in the area of new
           equity index derivatives,1294 and the elimination of actual and potential competition in
           the markets for off-order book services for block size European ETD contracts
           (irrespective of how this market might be further divided), and for trade registration,
           confirmation and CCP clearing services for flexible versions of European equity futures
           and options traded OTC.
   1290
             See replies to question 44 of questionnaire Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011
             – Competitors.
   1291
             See replies to question 39 of Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – Competitors.
   1292
             Remedies Notice, paragraph 9.
   1293
             See Sections 11.2.1.4.2 and 11.2.1.5 of this Decision.
   1294
             See Section 11.2.1.6 of this Decision.
EN                                                          344                                                  EN

   (1443) According to the Notifying Parties, the Commitments of 14 December 2011 aim at
         addressing these issues in the following manner:
              - elimination of actual and potential competition in the area of existing and new
                   European single stock equity derivatives is designed to be addressed by the
                   Divestment commitment;
              - elimination of competition in the area of new European interest rate derivatives
                   and European equity index derivatives is designed to be addressed by the ITPA
                   commitment;
              - elimination of actual and potential competition in the area of exisitng European
                   interest rate derivatives is designed to be addressed by the licence of Eurex’
                   interest rate trading software; and
              - and elimination of actual and potential competition in the markets for off-order
                   book services for block size European ETD contracts (irrespective of how this
                   market might be further divided), and for trade registration, confirmation and
                   CCP clearing services for flexible versions of European equity futures and
                   options traded OTC is designed to be addressed by Divestment Commitment
                   whereby NYX' Bclear service would be divested.
   (1444) The Notifying Parties argue that these substantially improved commitments
         "completely and comprehensively resolve" the concerns identified in the SO and
         address issues stemming form the first market test.1295
   (1445) However, while at face value, the Commitments of 14 December 2011 aim at
         addressing all competition concerns, in reality the scope of the proposed commitments
         is insufficient to address all competition concerns identified in the SO and this Decision
         entirely. In reality, only the concerns relating to the elimination of competition in the
         area of new interest rate contracts and concerns related to the elimination of actual and
         potential competition in the markets for off order book trading and for trade
         registration, confirmation and CCP clearing services for flexible versions of European
         equity futures and options traded OTC could, subject to the issues outlined below, be
         potentially adequately addressed by the Commitments of 14 December 2011.1296
   (1446) First, the Commitments of 14 December 2011 do not address the competition
         concern identified in the SO and this Decision relating to the elimination of actual and
         potential competition in the area of existing interest rate derivatives contracts. Indeed,
         the SO and this Decision conclude that Eurex and Liffe are each other's closest actual
         and potential competitors in the area of interest rate derivatives irrespective of whether
         the market for interest rate derivatives should be subdivided in short-term and long-
         term interest rate derivatives. 1297 However, the ITPA commitment addresses only one
         aspect of the competitive dynamics between the Notifying Parties in the area of interest
   1295
           Notifying Parties, Briefing Paper on the Parties' Commitments, 20 December 2011.
   1296
           See Section 11.2.3.1 for the analysis of markets for off-book trading and for trade registration for trade
           registration, confirmation and CCP clearing services for flexible versions of European equity futures
           and options traded OTC.
   1297
           See Section 11.2.1.4 of this Decision.
EN                                                       345                                                          EN

         rate derivatives, namely the concern related to the elimination of competition in new
         products.1298 As concerns the competition between the Notifying Parties in existing
         interest rate contracts, the Commitments of 14 December 2011 aim at addressing it with
         the offer to license Eurex' interest rate trading software, which as highlighted during the
         market test, is not relevant in this case as most potential competitors already have such
         software or could obtain it without any difficulties. It follows that the proposed
         commitments fall short of covering one of the main identified competition concerns.1299
   (1447) Second, while the Notifying Parties proposed to divest all single stock equity
         derivatives overlaps, the scope of the Divestment business remains uncertain given the
         regulatory issues associated with the divestment of NYX’ contracts in its home
         markets. While the Commitments of 14 December 2011 propose to divest NYX
         contracts in all markets concerned (as compared to the mix and match approach adopted
         in the Commitments of 21 November 2011 whereby the combination of NYX and DB
         contracts would be divested, DB contracts being divested in NYX’ home markets), such
         divestment is conditional upon the agreement of the relevant national regulatory
         authorities.1300 As a result, the scope of the business to be ultimately divested depends
         on third parties, namely competent regulators. The second market test indicated that
         […]* obtaining such approvals could be problematic.1301It follows that the ultimate
         Divestment business would therefore most likely result in a combination of assets from
         both Notifying Parties. In this respect, the first market test clearly showed that an
         approach whereby a combination of contracts from NYX and DB would be divested
         would affect the viability of the Divestment business, a risk that is also recognised in
         the Remedies Notice.1302 In addition, the second market test indicated that obtaining the
         necessary regulatory approvals could imply delays in the divestment process which in
         turn would result in a significant execution and valuation risk for the potential
         Purchaser.
   (1448) Third, while the new proposal addresses, at least to a certain extent, the issue of the
         symbiotic relationship between single equity derivatives and equity index derivatives
         by offering cross-margining between the divested single equity contracts and equity
         index contracts in the merged entity's margin pool, the issues of symbiotic relationship
         between single equity derivatives and underlying cash equities remains unresolved.
   1298
          The Notifying Parties have claimed at several occasions that competition in new products is the only
          "genuine competition" in the area of derivatives, everything else being just "copycats". This is however
          at odds with Notifying Parties' claims that CME is their strongest competitor in the area of short term
          interest rate derivatives with its Euribor contract (which is substantially the same as Liffe's Euribor
          contract) and the claim that true innovations are extremely rare. See agreed minutes of technical
          meeting on informal remedies proposal of 14 November 2011 with the Notifying Parties of 17
          November 2011, paragraph 15, and Notifying Parties' response to the SO of 5 October 2011, Interest
          rate derivatives, paragraph 85.
   1299
          In this context, it should be recalled that interest rate derivatives represent a substantial proportion of
          the Notifying Parties' derivatives revenues ([…]*% for Liffe and […]*% for Eurex - Form CO,
          Annexes D.18 and D.19). In their submission of 17 January 2012 (page 7), the Notifying Parties stated
          that "the inclusion of existing products into the ITPA commitment would be disproportionate."
   1300
          Regulatory approval is in particular problematic in NYX' home markets where NYX is the incumbent
          regulated exchange.
   1301
          See replies to question 4 of Market test of commitments offered on 17 November 2011 – Regulators.
   1302
          Remedies Notice, paragraph 37: "A divestiture of a combination of certain assets which did not form a
          uniform and viable business in the past creates risks as to the viability and competitiveness of the
          resulting business."
EN                                                        346                                                         EN

           Therefore, as indicated during both market tests, it is possible, that for viability
           purposes, the Divestment business would have to include some additional assets.
   (1449) Finally, even the scope of the ITPA Commitment for equity index derivatives
           appears insufficient in view of the fact that most new equity index derivatives contracts
           that are currently in the pipeline of Notifying Parties' competitors would not meet the
           restrictive correlation thresholds specified in the Commitments of 14 December 2011.
           Indeed, as indicated during the market test, even a correlation coefficient of 99% would
           not be sufficient to include some of the BATS' CHERI indices as these have at times
           correlation higher than 99% with other Notifying Parties' equity index derivatives
           contracts, in particular those based on Eurostoxx. As a result, the ITPA Commitment
           would not be effective in practice to address this concern.
   (1450) On the basis of the above, and the results of the market test, the Commission
           considers that the scope of the Commitments of 14 December 2011 is insufficient, first,
           because it fails to fully address all competition concerns. Second, even the scope of the
           commitments that aim at addressing the identified competition concerns is insufficient
           due to viability, workability and effectiveness reasons.
        13.3.2.2.THE COMMITMENTS            OF 14 DECEMBER           2011    ARE NOT SUITABLE TO REMEDY
                  COMPETITION CONCERNS IN THIS CASE
   (1451) The Commission analysed the suitability of the Commitments of 14 December 2011
           to remedy the entirety of competition concerns identified in this Decision. In addition to
           the fact that the Commitments of 14 December 2011 are insufficient in scope as
           explained in Recitals (1441)-(1450) above, the offered commitments are not suitable to
           remedy competition concerns in this case as they are unlikely to generate an operator
           that would exert a competitive constraint on the merged entity similar to the one that
           exists between the Notifying Parties today.
   (1452) As concerns the area of single equity derivatives, provided that all NYX single
           equity business (including Bclear) would indeed be divested, the Divestment business
           would represent […]* of NYX today's derivatives revenues. Provided that all divested
           open interest were to remain with the Purchaser, which appears to be a rather unlikely
           scenario in the light of the results of the market test indicating that most customers
           would prefer to close out their open positions before such divestment takes place,1303
           this would create a small scale operator that would have to compete head-to-head with
           the merged entity. In addition, it should also be noted that any such competition would
           not be on an equal footing as the Purchaser would not necessarily have the possibility
           of offering trading in the underlying cash equities and in the linked equity index
           derivatives.
   1303
            20 out of 40 customers indicated that their likely reaction in case of a divestment would be to close out
            their positions or to transfer their open interest to the merged entity; only 8 out of 40 customers
            indicated that they move their open interest to the Purchaser; the choice of the remaining customers
            would depend either on the Purchaser (8 customers), or on their client's choice (2 customers) or on other
            factors, such as liquidity (2 customers). See replies to question 3 of questionnaire Market test of
            commitments offered on 17 November 2011 – Customers. In addition, given the time necessary for the
            completion of the transfer of open interest, it is all the more possible that the merged entity would
            regain the open interest from the divestment business ahead of the divestment.
EN                                                        347                                                         EN

   (1453) The ITPA commitment as designed in the Commitments of 14 December 2011 is
         also unsuitable in this case. First, in addition to the fact that the ITPA commitment is
         insufficient in scope, the very workability of the commitment is questionable. This is
         because inter alia, the commitment relies on correlation as a means to determine the
         scope of eligible contracts. However, as explained during the market test, correlation is
         not a tool that is best adapted in this case as, contrary to the Notifying Parties' claim, it
         does not allow establishing in advance of any request for access, with a sufficient
         degree of certainty, which contracts are eligible for access. This is because the
         correlation calculation depends heavily on data held by the Notifying Parties (on their
         existing contracts) and because the degree of correlation between two contracts can
         change significantly over time. Two contracts could have a limited positive correlation
         for some period of time, but then, due to an event that affects both contracts (for
         instance a financial crisis), the correlation coefficient may increase substantially for that
         period.
   (1454) In addition, even assuming it were workable, it implies that the merged entity's
         competitors would have to rely on the merged entity for their clearing services.
         Pursuant to the Commitments of 14 December 2011, the merged entity, through the
         ITPA Committee, would have the ability to determine which new products its
         competitors bring to the market, and at what cost and speed. In addition, this exclusive
         clearing arrangement1304 would further reinforce the merged entity's margin pool and its
         position as a dominant player in the area of derivatives trading and clearing in Europe.
         It follows that under these circumstances, the proposed commitments are unlikely to
         create an independent viable competitive force in the derivatives markets concerned in
         Europe and that would be in a position to effectively constrain the merged entity in a
         similar fashion as the Notifying Parties constrain each other pre-merger. In addition, the
         issue of inefficiencies associated with the splitting of the margin pools is not addressed
         by the new commitments. While the Purchaser of the Divestment business could in
         theory benefit from Eurex clearing for both its single equity derivatives business and
         the eligible interest rate and equity index derivatives contracts, there would still be a
         subset of contracts that the Purchaser would have to clear at another clearing-house. As
         a result, the Purchaser would be in a disadvantageous position compared to the merged
         entity as it could not offer its customers full cross-margining benefits. Obviously, other
         competitors, which would not benefit from the Divestment commitment, would be in an
         even worse position with an even wider pool of contracts that would not be eligible for
         clearing at the merged entity as they could not benefit from access for single equity
         derivatives.
   (1455) Finally, it is unlikely that the proposed software licence commitment in the area of
         interest rate derivatives would make any significant contribution to resolving the
         competition issues in this Decision as such a licence was not identified by market
         participants as an actual barrier to entry into the market for trading and clearing of
         interest rate derivatives. Indeed, at no point in time did the market investigation or the
         market test of the proposed commitments provide any indications that entry into
         European interest rate derivatives markets would be hindered by a lack of appropriate
         trading software. Instead, as already explained in the Section of this Decision dealing
   1304
           Pursuant to the Commitments, contracts subject to the ITPA cannot be cleared by another clearing-
           house.
EN                                                   348                                                     EN

           with barriers to entry,1305the main obstacle new entrants face in their attempts to enter
           the derivatives markets in question is the access to a margin pool of correlated
           contracts.1306As has been explained in this Section of the Decision, the commitments
           designed to address this barrier fall significantly short of the required standard, inter
           alia because of the limitation in scope to new contracts and because of fundamental
           doubts about their workability and viability.
   (1456) It follows that if anything, the Commitments of 14 December 2011 together could
           contribute to a creation of a small scale operator, active in certain niche markets,
           dependent on the merged entity for clearing of certain contracts and unable to offer the
           same cross-margining benefits as the merged entity. Such a competitor would therefore
           be in an inherently disadvantageous position vis-à-vis the merged entity which would
           have both the ability and incentives to undermine its capacity to effectively compete in
           the market. Indeed, the proposed commitments, if implemented, would have as their
           effect the preservation of the Notifying Parties' existing leading position in their
           benchmark product shielding them from competition, while it would give the
           opportunity to the merged entity to free-ride on third parties' innovations by
           immediately copying new contracts introduced in its margin pool by ITPs.1307 As a
           result, the proposed commitments, if implemented, would not address effectively the
           competition concerns identified in this case because they would not create a player that
           could exert a similar competitive constraint to that which the Notifying Parties exert on
           each other pre-merger.
   (1457) In this respect, the Notifying Parties claim that the proposed commitments will
           "more than replace any competitive constraint that the Parties exert on each other
           today".1308However, as explained in the preceding Recital, the commitments taken
           together would at best create a small scale competitor which by definition would not be
           able to sufficiently constrain the two exchanges today. This is because, as explained in
           the competitive assessment Section of this Decision, what makes the competitive
           relationship between Liffe and Eurex unique is, inter alia, their comparable scale,
           margin pools and membership base.
   (1458) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that the Commitments of 14
           December 2011 taken together are not suitable to effectively remedy the competition
           concerns identified in this Decision.
        13.3.2.3.THE COMMITMENTS OF 14 DECEMBER 2011 ARE UNLIKELY TO LEAD TO SUFFICIENT
                 AND TIMELY ENTRY
   (1459) According to the Remedies Notice, "the commitments must be capable of being
           implemented effectively within a short period of time"1309. In case of structural
           commitments, this means that a suitable Purchaser can be found in a reasonable time
           frame. As concerns access commitments, "they may be acceptable to the Commission in
   1305
            See Section 11.2.1.7. of this Decision.
   1306
            See Section 11.2.1.7.1.2. of this Decision.
   1307
            The initial one-year innovation period allows the merged entity and other ITPs to copy the products
            newly introduced by an ITP during one year from the product's launch date.
   1308
            Notifying Parties, Briefing Paper on the Parties' Commitments, 20 December 2011.
   1309
            Remedies Notice, paragraph 9.
EN                                                        349                                                   EN

         circumstances where it is sufficiently clear that there will be actual entry of new
         competitors that would eliminate any significant impediment to effective
         competition"1310.
   (1460) First, as regards the Divestment Business in its form and scope as specified in the
         Commitments of 14 December 2011, it is unclear whether a suitable Purchaser could be
         found in a timely manner. This is in particular in view of the questionable viability of
         the business and the likely regulatory hurdles leading to a substantial valuation and
         execution risk for a potential Purchaser1311.
   (1461) While the Notifying Parties claimed that they were in discussions with several
         potential Purchasers for the Divestment Business, namely [Competitor 1]*, [Competitor
         2]*, [Competitor 3]*and [Competitor 6]*, only one third party, [Competitor 2]*,
         indicated that it would be potentially interested depending on the valuation of the
         business.
   (1462) However, even if [Competitor 2]* were to acquire the Divestment business, in view
         of the limited scale of the business, it is unlikely that it would be in a position to
         constrain the merged entity in a similar fashion as the merging parties constrain each
         other pre-merger in the area of European single equity derivatives.
   (1463) Similarly, as concerns the interest expressed by [Competitor 5]* in its letter of 11
         January 2012 transmitted to the Commission by the Notifying Parties, it should first be
         noted that [Competitor 5]* received questionnaires market testing both packages to
         which [Competitor 5]* did not reply, despite reminders.1312 While the credibility
         of[Competitor 5]*'s non-binding offer to acquire the Divestment business has not been
         verified, the Commission notes that even if [Competitor 5]* were to be genuinely
         interested in acquiring the Divestment business, there would still remain issues as to the
         viability and the workability of the commitment as explained in Section 13.3.2.1 above.
   (1464) As regards the access remedies, as already explained, these can only be considered as
         sufficient and be accepted if they are equivalent to a divestiture in their effect. This is
         only the case when it can be established with a sufficient degree of likelihood that a
         timely entry will occur and will be able to exert sufficient competitive constraint to
         discipline the merged entity to the extent that the anti-competitive effects of the merger
         are counteracted. In this Decision, not only did the market test provide strong
         indications that it is unlikely that the proposed access remedy in the area of interest rate
         and equity index derivatives would have an effect equivalent to a divestiture,1313 it also
         did not reveal any interest from a third party to apply for such access pursuant to the
         Commitments.1314 This is because the proposed access commitments defined by
   1310
           Remedies Notice, paragraph 63.
   1311
           According to paragraph 24 of the Remedies Notice "in proposing a viable business for divestiture, it is
           necessary to take into account the uncertainties and risks related to the transfer of a business to a new
           owner. These risks may limit the competitive impact of the divested business, and, therefore, may lead
           to a market situation where the competition concerns at stake will not necessarily be eliminated."
   1312
           Similarly, [Competitor 5]* received a market investigation questionnaire sent in the first phase to which
           it replied. However, [Competitor 5]* did not reply to the questionnaire it received within the framework
           of the second phase market investigation.
   1313
           See replies to question 21 of Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – Competitors.
   1314
           See replies to question 32 of Market test of commitments offered on 14 December 2011 – Competitors.
EN                                                        350                                                        EN

           correlation coefficient thresholds are too restrictive to generate entry. In addition, in
           view of the fact that the proposed commitments would lead to the splitting of margin
           pools, as contracts that are not eligible for access would have to be cleared at another
           clearing-house, and the fact that the merged entity would have the ability to copy third
           parties' innovations, the incentives of third parties to apply for access are very low.
           Indeed, under the designed access commitment, there is little to gain and potentially
           much to lose for a new entrant. It follows that the proposed access commitment would
           not have an effect equivalent to a divestiture.
   (1465) Finally, given that the proposed software Licence commitment in the area of interest
           rate derivatives does not address an actual barrier to entry in these markets, and the fact
           that no competitors showed any interest to purchase such a licence, it is unlikely that
           any effective entry would arise on the basis of this commitment.
   (1466) On the basis of the above, and in light of the results of the market test, the
           Commission considers that the Commitments of 14 December 2011 are unlikely to lead
           to a timely and sufficient entry so as to counteract the anti-competitive effects which
           are likely to occur in the derivatives markets where this Decision identified a significant
           impediment of effective competition. As a result, the Commission considers that the
           Commitments of 14 December 2011 are unlikely to be effective in practice.
        13.3.2.4.THE COMMITMENTS        OF 14 DECEMBER 2011     WOULD BE DIFFICULT TO IMPLEMENT
                 AND MONITOR
   (1467) According to the Remedies Notice, where "the parties submit remedies proposals
           that are so extensive and complex that it is not possible for the Commission to
           determine with the requisite degree of certainty, at the time of its decision, that they will
           be fully implemented and that they are likely to maintain effective competition in the
           market, an authorisation decision cannot be granted. The Commission may reject such
           remedies in particular on the grounds that the implementation of the remedies cannot
           be effectively monitored and that the lack of effective monitoring diminishes, or even
           eliminates, the effect of the commitments proposed."1315 In addition, as concerns access
           commitments, the Remedies Notice recognises that they are often complex in nature
           and therefore that "the Commission will only be able to accept such commitments where
           the complexity does not lead to a risk of their effectiveness from the outset and where
           the monitoring devices proposed ensure that those commitments will be effectively
           implemented and the enforcement mechanism will lead to timely results."1316
   (1468) The commitments submitted by the Notifying Parties in this case are at the same time
           complex and novel. As concerns the Divestment commitment as specified in the
           Commitments of 14 December 2011, first, there are doubts about its precise scope
           which makes its implementation not straightforward. The fact that there is uncertainty
           as to whether the necessary regulatory approvals for divestment of NYX' "home
           markets" will be granted exacerbates the complexity of the divestment process,
           therefore undermining the effectiveness of the proposed commitment. Second, there are
   1315
            Remedies Notice, paragraph 14.
   1316
            Remedies Notice, paragraph 66.
EN                                                  351                                                  EN

         some question marks about the very feasibility of the transfer of open interest in
         particular in view of its possible erosion during a divestment process that is likely to be
         lengthy and complex. Third, the role of the ITPA Committee (chaired by a Eurex
         representative having a tie-breaking vote) in the application process and the
         determination of eligible ITPs could give rise to discriminatory practices which would
         be difficult to monitor in view of the vague criteria on the basis of which the ITPA
         Committee is meant to take decisions pursuant to the commitments.
   (1469) Similarly, the proposed ITPA Commitment raises a range of issues casting
         significant doubts on its effectiveness. Indeed the complexity of the proposed
         arrangement and the fact that there are currently no similar arrangements that could
         serve as a model raise significant issues about the possibility to implement such a
         commitment such that it is effective in practice. Given the very nature of derivatives
         markets, where positions are outstanding during long periods of time during which risk
         needs to be adequately managed, designing a workable access solution in the absence of
         an appropriate regulatory framework is likely to be extremely difficult and complex.
   (1470) Indeed, the market tests in the case at hand revealed a number of technical issues that
         would make the effective implementation of the proposed access commitments very
         problematic and challenging. Amongst the issues that highlighted the greatest concern,
         three examples in particular need to be mentionned: first, the criteria for determination
         of eligible ITPs are unclear to the extent that it does not appear possible to determine ex
         ante the pool of potential eligible applicants. Second, the determination of eligible
         contracts on the basis of a complex correlation formula appears problematic especially
         in light of the fact that correlation is not stable over time. Many market participants
         pointed to the fact that the correlation, irrespective of its level,1317 may not be an
         appropriate criterion to determine eligible contracts as it may lead to perverse results
         such as de facto excluding all indices based on baskets of European securities from the
         scope of the eligible contracts. Third, in the absence of an unambiguous reference point,
         the setting of the access fees, and clearing fees in particular, is not clear-cut either. This
         is because Eurex today operates, and once the transaction would be implemented, the
         merged entity, will operate a vertical silo model whereby clearing and trading fees are
         bundled in one fee.- Therefore, it would be impossible to determine in a definite and
         transparent manner the level of applicable clearing costs. While the Notifying Parties
         suggested that the appropriate reference point could be the applicable market
         fees,1318given that the market is generally characterised by vertical integration, there is
         no such market reference available. In practice, only the unbundling of trading and
         clearing would allow teh determination of the cost of clearing in a definite manner.
   (1471) In addition, the ITPA commitment is complex in nature and would require
         monitoring that would be difficult to put in place using the tools provided for by the
         applicable merger control rules, such as the appointment of a monitoring trustee. Given
         the nature of the industry and the complexity of the ITPA commitment, a regulatory
         framework would be necessary to ensure that access is granted in a non-discriminatory
         manner, based on transparent rules and a clear and predictable fee structure.
   1317
           Except for a level that would be set to 100% in which case this criterion would become irrelevant.
   1318
           Notifying Parties, Briefing paper on the parties’ commitments, 20 December 2011, p. 7: [To address the
           Case Team’s concerns, the Parties would set their fees on the basis of an industry reference
           benchmark]*.
EN                                                       352                                                      EN

   (1472) It follows that the complexity of the Commitments of 14 December 2011 and the
           inherent difficulties associated with their implementation under the current market and
           regulatory set-up casts fundamental doubts over the workability and effectiveness of the
           proposed remedy package.
   (1473) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that the complexity of the
           Commitments of 14 December 2011 , and the ITPA Commitment in particular, renders
           their implementation and monitoring difficult in practice. As a result, it is not possible
           to determine with a sufficient degree of certainty that the commitments offered in this
           case would be effectively implemented such that effective competition would be
           maintained in the markets where there would be a significant impediment of
           competition.
       13.3.3. Commission's assessment of the informal pledge to freeze trading and clearing
                 fees for three years
   (1474) As concerns the Notifying Parties' publicised informal pledge not to increase
           derivatives trading and clearing fees for a period of three years, it should first be
          recalled that this pledge was at no time part of the formal commitments package
          officially submitted to the Commission and therefore its suitability to solve competition
          concerns was not subject to any market test run in this Decision. It is established case
           law that the Commission is not obliged to assess commitments that are not submitted in
           due form as specified in Article 20 of the Commission Regulation (EC) No 802/2004 of
           7 April 2004 implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 of 20 January 2004 on
           the control of concentrations between undertakings.1319
   (1475) In any event, the price freeze pledge, even if it were to be formally submitted as a
           commitment, would be unlikely to address the competition concerns identified in this
           case. According to the Remedies Notice, "commitments relating to the future behaviour
           of the merged entity may be acceptable only exceptionally in very specific
           circumstances. In particular, commitments in the form of undertakings not to raise
           prices, […] will generally not eliminate competition concerns resulting from horizontal
           overlaps. In any case, those types of remedies can only exceptionally be accepted if
           their workability is fully ensured by effective implementation and monitoring […], and
          if they do not risk leading to distorting effects on competition. "1320
   (1476) In this respect, the Commission notes that given the nature of the industry at stake,
           and in particular the fact that actual trading and clearing fees are based on a number of
           complex and non-transparent rebate schemes rather than on published list prices1321, the
           relevance of this informal pledge appears limited. This also means that any such pledge
           would be too complex to implement and monitor in practice. In addition, the caveat
           whereby the fees could be changed "due to market developments, legal or regulatory
           constraints or other circumstances"1322 would further increase the difficulties
           associated with the monitoring of such a commitment. Last but not least, as already
           explained in the competitive assessment Section of this Decision, the example of cash
   1319
            OJ L 133, 30.04.2004, p.1.
   1320
            Remedies notice, paragraph 17.
   1321
            See paragraphs (503), (505) and (672) of this Decision dealing with the analysis of fees.
   1322
            Deutsche Boerse, NYSE Euronext, Letter to Vice-President Almunia, 15 December 2011.
EN                                                        353                                         EN

          markets shows that, historically, competition rather than price regulation generates the
          most efficient fee reduction benefits for customers. As such, only commitments
          fostering genuine competition should be expected to lead to fee reductions.
   (1477) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that, even if it were to be
          submitted as a formal commitment in this Decision, it is unlikely that the suggested fee
          freeze would be suitable to resolve the competition concerns in the case at hand.
     13.4. CONCLUSION
   (1478) The Commission analysed the suitability of the Commitments of 14 December 2011
          to remedy the entirety of competition concerns identified in this Decision taking also
          into consideration the efficiencies. To this end, the Commission analysed the scope of
          the proposed commitments, the likelihood of a timely and sufficient entry on the basis
          of the proposed commitments as well as their ability to be implemented and monitored
          and the likelihood to be effective in practice.
   (1479) First, the Commission concludes that the scope of the Commitments of 14 December
          2011 is insufficient as it does not entirely address all competition concerns identified in
          this Decision. This is without prejudice to the fact that some competition concerns
          identified in this Decision, in particular those relating to off order book services and for
          trade registration, confirmation and CCP clearing services for flexible versions of
          European equity futures and options traded OTC, may be, on an isolated basis,
          addressed to an adequate extent.1323 Given that there are doubts about the viability of
          the Divestment Business itself, it is concluded that the competition concerns even in
          these areas are not addressed to a sufficient extent1324.
   (1480) Second, the Commission concludes that the Commitments of 14 December 2011
          taken together are unlikely to be effective in practice as there are significant doubts
          about their very workability and ability to be implemented and monitored.
   (1481) Third, the Commission concludes that the Commitments of 14 December 2011 are
          not likely to lead to a timely entry that would constrain the merged entity to a sufficient
          extent in all markets where competition concerns are identified in this Decision. Indeed,
          while it is possible that under certain circumstances the Divestment Business could find
          a Purchaser, the possibility of a sufficient and timely entry in the area of interest rate
          derivatives is remote.
   (1482) Therefore, on the basis of the analysis of the Commitments of 14 December 2011
          and the results of the market test, the Commission concludes that overall, the
          Commitments of 14 December 2011 are not suitable to remedy the competition
   1323
            However, the Commission notes that while the divestment of Bclear would address the competition
            concerns in the areas of off-order book trading and trade registration, confirmation and CCP clearing
            services for flexible versions of European equity futures and options traded OTC, such divestment
            would be viable only if divested together with the underlying contracts traded on-order book and
            included in the Divestment Business.
   1324
            It is also recalled that the Divestment Commitment would affect the recognised efficiencies in Section
            12 as the collateral savings from additional cross-margining opportunities between single stock
            derivatives traded on Eurex and Liffe would no longer materialise to the same extent.
EN                                                      354                                                        EN

         concerns identified in this case. It follows that these commitments are not capable of
         remedying the significant impediment of effective competition in the markets identified
         in this Decision, and of rendering the notified transaction compatible with the internal
         market.
   14.    CONCLUSION
   (1483) In view of all that precedes, the Commission concludes that the notified transaction
         would significantly impede effective competition in the internal market or a substantial
         part thereof within the meaning of Article 2(3) of the Merger Regulation. This is
         because the notified transaction would result in the creation of a dominant or near-
         monopoly position and the elimination of the closest actual and potential competitor in
         the area of existing and new European exchange-traded single stock equity derivatives
         and European exchange-traded interest rate derivatives products. In addition, the
         notified transaction would eliminate the closest competitor in the area of new European
         exchange-traded equity index derivatives. Finally, the notified transaction would
         significantly impede effective competition by creating a dominant or near-monopoly
         position and eliminating the closest actual and potential competitor in the markets for
         off-order book services for block size European ETD contracts (irrespective of how this
         market might be further divided), and for trade registration, confirmation and CCP
         clearing services for flexible versions of European equity futures and options traded
         OTC.
   (1484) The notified transaction must, therefore, be declared incompatible with the internal
         market and the EEA Agreement pursuant to Article 8(3) of the Merger Regulation and
         Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
EN                                                355                                             EN

   HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION:
                                              Article 1
   The notified concentration whereby NYSE Euronext and Deutsche Börse enter into a full
   merger within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of the Merger Regulation is hereby declared
   incompatible with the internal market and the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
                                              Article 2
   This Decision is addressed to
         DEUTSCHE BÖRSE AG
         Mergenthalerallee 6
         65760 Eschborn
         Germany
         NYSE EURONEXT
         11 Wall Street
         10005 New York
         United States of America
   Done at Brussels, 1.2.2012
                                               (Signed)
                                               For the Commission
                                               Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                Vice-President
EN                                              356                                         EN

                                                     Annex
   1.    OUTPUT      FOR THE DIFFERENT LIQUIDITY MEASURES PROPOSED BY THE NOTIFYING
           PARTIES
   (1) The Annex sets out additional output for the different liquidity measures proposed by
       the Notifying Parties. This output complements the analysis presented in Section
       12.3.3of the Decision and forms an integral part of it.
   (2) The analysis in this Annex is solely based on data employed by the Notifying Parties in
       their analysis. As described in Section 12.3.3 of the Decision, this analysis is simply a
       generalisation of the methodology proposed by the Notifying Parties. The analysis
       confirms the concerns set out by the Commission in the SO1 and responds to the claims
       made by the Notifying Parties in their submissions2.
   (3) The Notifying Parties have put forward an array of liquidity measures to sustain their
       claim that the creation of Euronext led to an increase in liquidity. Subsequently they
       argue that such improvement in liquidity would equally result from this notified
       transaction. The identification problems described for the analysis of bid-ask spreads
       presented in Section 12.3.3 of the Decision similarly occur for these additional set of
       liquidity measures. In addition to the results on bid-ask spread (Figures 1-10 below),
       and for completeness, this Annex simply reports results on the alternative liquidity
       measures proposed by the Notifying Parties. As set out in the Decision for bid-ask
       spreads, Figures 11-61 below on the alternative liquidity measures, show no
       systematically identified impact of the Euronext mergers on those alternative liquidity
       measures. In any case, it is not clear how the alleged effects on volatility, turnover, the
       value of traded volume and volume would translate into efficiency gains. As explained
       in Recital (1142), the burden of proof to verify the efficiencies is on the Notifying
       Parties. They do not clarify in which way the alternative liquidity measures can be
       mapped into efficiency gains3.
   (4) As described in the Decision, the regression output set out below employs the
       specification suggested by the Notifying Parties, but replaces their dummy integration
       variables with exchange dummy variables that interact with the quarters of each year
       for each exchange. Regression 2 below sets out the Notifying Parties' preferred
   1
         In particular paragraphs 590, 593-594 and 598 of the SO
   2
         The Notifying Parties submitted two papers dealing with efficiencies in their response to the SO
         "Response to Statement of Objections-Transaction related Efficiencies" of 24 October 2011 and
         Compass Lexecon "Efficiencies from the proposed transaction" of 24 October 2011. Furthermore, the
         Notifying Parties submitted a memorandum Compass Lexecon "Response to comments at oral hearing"
         of 16 November 2011. On 5 and 13 December 2011 the Notifying Parties submitted additional reports
         by Compass Lexecon "The relevance of Euronext integration to the Transaction" and "Response to
         Commission services economic experts' econometric analysis" 13 December 2011".
   3
         The Notifying Parties faced the same problem in their attempt to quantify the alleged liquidity benefits
         for derivatives where they solely looked at effect on volume, see Section 12.3.4 of the Decision.
EN                                                     357                                                        EN

          specification in terms of regressor choice while regression 1 uses the log of the annual
          GDP per capita in addition4.
   (5)    For illustrative purposes, the regression equation for the normalised bid-ask spread is set
            out as follows5:
                                             2010Q 4
    Log ( Bid - AskSpread ) i ,t = a +         <U+2211>ß      jk × [Quarter - index ]dummy jk + X i ,t d + Yi ,t<U+03D5> + <U+03B8> i + e i ,t
                                           k = 2000Q 4
              (a)    Where subscript i denotes each of the securities, t denotes the time period, k
                     stands for the quarter-year periods and j denotes each of the indexes.
              (b)     [Quarter - index ]dummy jk is           a dummy variable interacting the quarter-year k
                     with each index j.
              (c)      X i ,t is a vector of dummy variables that controls for some relevant economic
                     and political events. There are one day events.
              (d)    Yi ,t is a vector of variables for other determinants of liquidity of the market.
                     These include the (20-day) historical volatility of the DAX index; the traded
                     volume on the Frankfurt exchange; a tick size dummy, which takes the value of
                     1 after 2007 and is equal to 0 before then; the per capita GDP for each of the
                     countries with Euronext exchanges; the volume traded at MTFs; the market
                     capitalisation; and the last price of security.
              (e)    <U+03B8> i is a vector of security specific effects.
              (f)     e i,t denotes the standard statistical error.
   (6)    The dataset employed by the Notifying Parties is a panel including data for 158 large
          caps comprising the four main indices over the period 1/01/2000 and 31/12/2010 (AEX
          includes 45 securities, BEL includes 28 securities, CAC includes 51 securities and PSI
          includes 34 securities).
   (7)    This Annex first sets out the output for bid-ask spread for the pooled exchange and
          individual exchange regressions.6 The output for the pooled regression is presented for
          the full sample (1/01/2000-31/12/2010) and for a pre-MiFID subsample (1/01/2000-
          31/12/2006). In addition, the average monthly residuals from the Notifying Parties'
          specification without including their integration dummies are presented. Second, this
          Annex reports output for the pooled and individual exchange regressions with the
   4
            For some figures plotting the regression coefficients, a non smooth pattern is observed at the beginning
            of 2007. This follows from the interaction between the log of MTF and the tick size dummy. The
            corresponding graphs plotting the coefficients for a regression omitting the tick size dummy are
            reported at the end of the document. However, the main qualitative conclusions for this Decision do not
            change.
   5
            Similar specifications are employed for each additional liquidity measures.
   6
            The pooled regression runs the model for the complete data sample, including data for each of the 158
            large caps of each of the securities. The individual exchange regression runs the model respectively for
            a dataset restricted to each of the individual exchanges.
EN                                                             358                                                        EN

           corresponding residuals for volumes, volatility, turnover, value of traded volume and
           average weighted-spread for the CAC-40 securities.
    1.1.      BID ASK SPREAD
      1.1.1.      Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Table 1: Regressions on normalised bid-ask spread of large caps in Paris, Amsterdam,
   Brussels and Lisbon - pooled regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects,
   1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln (bid-ask spread)                                                                     Reg.1                  Reg.2
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                  […]*                   […]*
                                                                                            […]*                   […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                         […]*                   […]*
                                                                                            […]*                   […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                        […]*                   […]*
                                                                                            […]*                   […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                      […]*                   […]*
                                                                                            […]*                   […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                          […]*                   […]*
                                                                                            […]*                   […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                           […]*                   […]*
                                                                                            […]*                   […]*
   Annual GDP per capita (log of)                                                           […]*                   […]*
                                                                                            […]*                   […]*
   Constant                                                                                 […]*                   […]*
                                                                                            […]*                   […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                         […]*                   […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                   […]*                   […]*
   Observations                                                                             […]*                   […]*
   R-squared                                                                                […]*                   […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed of 158 large caps.
   These are securities that together make up the main stock indices of Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam and Lisbon (CAC 40,
   BEL20, AEX and the PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions include a set of single-day event dummies
EN                                                             359                                                           EN

   (not reported); (e) bid-ask spreads calculated using price data provided by Bloomberg. Regression 1 and regression 2 differ
   because only regression 1 includes the log of annual GDP per capita. The coefficient estimates for the exchange-quarter
   dummies are separately represented in the below Figures.
   Figure 1: Quarter-year- index coefficients from Regression 1 on normalised bid-ask
   spread (see Table 1)
   [                                                                                                                            ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. The explanatory variables
   (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange, a dummy
   variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita annual GDP, market
   capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events
   which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of normalised bid-ask spread. The vertical lines indicate
   the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the
   integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration
   of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                                360                                                                EN

   Figure 2: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 2 on normalised bid-ask
   spread (see Table 1)
   [                                                                                      ]*
   Note: See Figure 1 note above.
      1.1.2.      Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2006 (pre-MiFID)
   Table 2: Regressions on normalised bid-ask spread of large caps in Paris, Amsterdam,
   Brussels and Lisbon - pooled regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects,
   1/12/2000-31/12/2006
   Ln (bid-ask spread)                                           Reg.1              Reg.2
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                        […]*              […]*
                                                                  […]*              […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)               […]*              […]*
                                                                  […]*              […]*
   Annual GDP per capita (log of)                                 […]*              […]*
                                                                  […]*              […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                […]*              […]*
                                                                  […]*              […]*
EN                                                  361                                      EN

   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                     […]*                      […]*
                                                                                      […]*                      […]*
   Constant                                                                           […]*                      […]*
                                                                                      […]*                      […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                   […]*                      […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                             […]*                      […]*
   Observations                                                                       […]*                      […]*
   R-squared                                                                          […]*                      […]*
   Note: see Table 1 note above.
   Figure 3: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on normalised bid-ask
   spread 1/1/2000-31/12/2006 (see Table 2).
   [                                                                                                                     ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. The explanatory variables
   (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of normalised bid-ask spread.
   The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The
   first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the
   third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               362                                                            EN

   Figure 4: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 2 on normalised bid-ask
   spread 1/1/2000-31/12/2006 (see Table 2)
   [                                                                                   ]*
   Note: See Figure 3 note above.
      1.1.3.      Individuals exchange regressions for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
       1.1.3.1. PARIS
   Table 3: Regressions on normalised bid-ask spread of large caps in Paris - individual
   regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln (bid-ask spread)                                                           Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                       […]*
                                                                                 […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                              […]*
                                                                                 […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                           […]*
                                                                                 […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                               […]*
EN                                                  363                                   EN

                                                                                                         […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                        […]*
                                                                                                         […]*
   Constant                                                                                              […]*
                                                                                                         […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                      […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                […]*
   Observations                                                                                          […]*
   R-squared                                                                                             […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 51 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Paris (CAC 40) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita and the tick size dummy is omitted
   because of collinearity. The results for a regression including the log of the annual GDP per capita are equivalent. These
   results are therefore not reported. .
   Figure 5: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on normalised bid-ask
   spread 1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 3)
   [                                                                                                                    ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
EN                                                              364                                                           EN

   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of normalised bid-ask spread.
   The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The
   first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the
   third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
        1.1.3.2. AMSTERDAM
   Table 4: Regressions on normalised bid-ask spread of large caps in Amsterdam -
   individual regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln (bid-ask spread)                                                                                      Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                   […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                          […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                       […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                           […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                            […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Constant                                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                          […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                    […]*
   Observations                                                                                              […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                 […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 45 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Amsterdam (AEX) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita and the tick size dummy is omitted
   because of collinearity. The results for a regression including the log of the annual GDP per capita are equivalent. These
   results are therefore not reported.
EN                                                               365                                                            EN

   Figure 6: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on normalised bid-ask
   spread 1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 4)
   [                                                                                                                   ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of normalised bid-ask spread.
   The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The
   first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the
   third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
        1.1.3.3. BRUSSELS
   Table 5: Regressions on normalised bid-ask spread of large caps in Brussels - individual
   regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln (bid-ask spread)                                                                                 Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                              […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                     […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                  […]*
EN                                                               366                                                            EN

                                                                                                     […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                   […]*
                                                                                                     […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                    […]*
                                                                                                     […]*
   Constant                                                                                          […]*
                                                                                                     […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                  […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                            […]*
   Observations                                                                                      […]*
   R-squared                                                                                         […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 28 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Brussels (BEL 20) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita and the tick size dummy is omitted
   because of collinearity. The results for a regression including the log of the annual GDP per capita are equivalent. These
   results are therefore not reported.
   Figure 7: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on normalised bid-ask
   spread 1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 5)
   [                                                                                                                   ]*
EN                                                             367                                                            EN

   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of normalised bid-ask spread.
   The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The
   first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the
   third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
        1.1.3.4. LISBON
   Table 6: Regressions on normalised bid-ask spread of large caps in Lisbon - individual
   regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln (bid-ask spread)                                                                                        Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                     […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                            […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
   Tick size dummy                                                                                             […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                         […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                             […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                              […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
   Constant                                                                                                    […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                            […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                      […]*
   Observations                                                                                                […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                   […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 34 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Lisbon (PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions
   include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita is omitted because of collinearity from the first
   regression.. The results for a regression not including the log of the annual GDP per capita are equivalent. These results are
   therefore not reported.
EN                                                               368                                                              EN

   Figure 8: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on normalised bid-ask
   spread 1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 6)
   [                                                                                                                      ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of normalised bid-ask spread.
   The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The
   first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the
   third the integration of the Lisbon exchange. Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications on bid-ask spread for
   individuals stock exchanges for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   (8)      As described in the Decision, the following graphs plot the average monthly residuals
             resulting from the Notifying Parties' preferred specification and a second specification
             including in addition the log of the annual GDP per capita.7 Five different trends are
             then fitted to the residuals. These trends are fitted by regressing the average monthly
             residuals on these five trends, including an intercept for each phase. Each of these
             regressions is index specific. The five trends refer to the period prior to the merger, the
             two periods between mergers, a fourth trend until 31/12/2006 (pre-MiFID) and a fifth
             covering the remaining period.
   7
               The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange, the last
               price of the security, market capitalisation, a list of daily event dummies, month-and security fixed effects.
               The same methodology is employed for the remaining liquidity measures.
EN                                                                369                                                           EN

   Figure 9: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification by stock
   exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                                ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, volume traded on
   the Frankfurt exchange, MTF volume, the last price of the security, market capitalisation, tick size dummy, a list of daily
   event dummies, month-and security fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the four exchanges. The black lines
   are trends fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for the different merger periods, and also for a different slope
   after 2007. The first trend slopes, that for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration are always statistically significantly
   different from zero and negative, except for PSI. For these three a Wald test reports that the trend pre-merger and the first
   trend post merger are statistically different. For the first trend post merger the slope is negative and statistically significant for
   CAC and PSI. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                                  370                                                                   EN

   Figure 10: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification by stock
   exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 (Including log GDP per capita)
   [                                                                                                                                 ]*
     Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, volume traded on
     the Frankfurt exchange, MTF volume, tick size dummy, the last price of the security, market capitalisation, log of GDP per
     Capita, month-and security fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the four exchanges. The black lines are
     trends fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for the different merger periods, and also for a different slope
     after 2007. The first trend slopes, that for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration are always statistically
     significantly different from zero and negative, except for PSI. For these three a Wald test reports that the trend pre-merger
     and the first trend post merger are statistically different. For the first trend post merger the slope is negative and statistically
     significant in the case of PSI. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam
     exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the
     integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                                  371                                                                   EN

     1.2. VOLUMES
      1.2.1.     Year-month fixed effects on volumes for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Figure 11: Year-month fixed effects on volumes respectively for CAC-40, BEL-20, PSI
   and AEX securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                  ]*
   Note: The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
      1.2.2.     Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Table 7: Regressions on volumes of trades of large caps in Paris, Amsterdam, Brussels
   and Lisbon - pooled regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-
   31/12/2010
   Ln (volumes)                                                                                      Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                            […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                   […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
EN                                                            372                                                          EN

   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                       […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                           […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                            […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Constant                                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                          […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                    […]*
   Observations                                                                                              […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                 […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 158 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam and Lisbon (CAC 40, BEL20, AEX
   and the PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) The log of
   annual GDP per capita is omitted because of collinearity. Therefore, a regression without the log of annual GDP per capita is
   not reported as it would yield the same results.
EN                                                               373                                                              EN

   Figure 12: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on volumes 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 7)
   [                                                                                                                           ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. The explanatory variables
   (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange, a dummy
   variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita annual GDP, market
   capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events
   which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of volumes. The vertical lines indicate the different
   consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the
   Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon
   exchange.
       1.2.3.      Individual regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
        1.2.3.1. PARIS
   Table 8: Regressions on volumes of large caps in Paris - individual regression including
   quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln (volumes)                                                                                               Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                    […]*
                                                                                                              […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                           […]*
                                                                                                              […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                                          […]*
EN                                                                374                                                                EN

                                                                                                              […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                        […]*
                                                                                                              […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                            […]*
                                                                                                              […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                             […]*
                                                                                                              […]*
   Constant                                                                                                   […]*
                                                                                                              […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                           […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                     […]*
   Observations                                                                                               […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                  […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 51 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Paris (CAC 40) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita is omitted because of collinearity.
   Therefore, a regression without the log of annual GDP per capita is not reported as it would yield the same results.
EN                                                            375                                                           EN

   Figure 13: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on volumes 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 8)
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of volumes. The vertical lines
   indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the
   integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration
   of the Lisbon exchange.
       1.2.3.2. AMSTERDAM
   Table 9: Regressions on volumes of large caps in Amsterdam - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln (volumes)                                                                                            Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                            […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                         […]*
                                                                                                            […]*
EN                                                                376                                                            EN

   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                     […]*
                                                                                                           […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                         […]*
                                                                                                           […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                          […]*
                                                                                                           […]*
   Constant                                                                                                […]*
                                                                                                           […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                        […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                  […]*
   Observations                                                                                            […]*
   R-squared                                                                                               […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 45 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Amsterdam (AEX) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the tick size dummy and the log of GDP per capita are omitted
   from the first regression because of collinearity and the tick size dummy is omitted from the second regression because of
   collinearity.
EN                                                              377                                                           EN

   Figure 14: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on volumes 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 9 above)
   [                                                                                                                       ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of volumes. The vertical lines
   indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the
   integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration
   of the Lisbon exchange.
       1.2.3.3. BRUSSELS
   Table 10: Regressions on volumes of large caps in Brussels - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln (volumes)                                                                                            Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                            […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                         […]*
                                                                                                            […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                      […]*
EN                                                                378                                                            EN

                                                                                                          […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                        […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                         […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Constant                                                                                               […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                       […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                 […]*
   Observations                                                                                           […]*
   R-squared                                                                                              […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 28 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Brussels (BEL 20) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita and the tick size dummy is omitted
   because of collinearity. Therefore a regression without log of annual GDP per capita is not reported.
EN                                                              379                                                        EN

   Figure 15: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on volumes 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 10)
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of volumes. The vertical lines
   indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the
   integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration
   of the Lisbon exchange.
       1.2.3.4. LISBON
   Table 11: Regressions on volumes of large caps in Lisbon - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln (volumes)                                                                                            Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                            […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                         […]*
                                                                                                            […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                      […]*
EN                                                                380                                                            EN

                                                                                                                […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                              […]*
                                                                                                                […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                               […]*
                                                                                                                […]*
   Constant                                                                                                     […]*
                                                                                                                […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                             […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                       […]*
   Observations                                                                                                 […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                    […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 34 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Lisbon (PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions
   include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita and the tick size dummy is omitted because of
   collinearity. A regression without log of annual GDP per capita yields the same results and it is therefore not reported.
   Figure 16: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on volumes 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 11)
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
EN                                                             381                                                                EN

   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of volumes. The vertical lines
   indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the
   integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration
   of the Lisbon exchange.
       1.2.4.      Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications on volumes for individuals
                   stock exchanges for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Figure 17: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification on
   volumes by stock exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, volume traded on
   the Frankfurt exchange, MTF volume, tick size dummy, the last price of the security, market capitalisation, a list of daily
   event dummies, month-and security fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the four exchanges. The black lines
   are trends fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for the different merger periods, and also for a different slope
   after 2007. The first trend slopes, that for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration, is statistically significantly
   different from zero and negative in the case of AEX. The trend slopes after the last merger is statistically significant different
   from zero and positive in the case of PSI. A Wald test reports that in the case of AEX the trend pre-merger and the first trend
   post merger are statistically different. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and
   Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one
   the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                                382                                                                 EN

   Figure 18: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification on
   volumes by stock exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 (Including log GDP per
   capita)
   [                                                                                                                          ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, volume traded on
   the Frankfurt exchange, MTF volume, tick size dummy, the last price of the security, market capitalisation, log of GDP per
   Capita, month-and security fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the four exchanges. The black lines are trends
   fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for the different merger periods, and also for a different slope after 2007.
   The first trend slopes, that for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration, are statistically significantly different from
   zero in the case of AEX, while the slope of the trends post merger are statistically significant different from zero and negative
   always except for PSI. A Wald test reports that in the case of AEX the trend pre-merger and the first trend post merger are
   statistically different. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam
   exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the
   integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                                383                                                                 EN

     1.3. VOLATILITY
      1.3.1.      Year-month fixed effects for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Figure 19: Year-month fixed effects on 20 day-historical volatility respectively for CAC-
   40, BEL-20, AEX and PSI securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                               ]*
   Note: The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
      1.3.2.      Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Table 12: Regressions on 20 day historical volatility of large caps in Paris, Amsterdam,
   Brussels and Lisbon- pooled regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects,
   1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(Volatility)                                                                                   Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                          […]*
                                                                                                    […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                 […]*
                                                                                                    […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                                […]*
                                                                                                    […]*
EN                                                            384                                                          EN

   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                       […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                           […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                            […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Constant                                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                          […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                    […]*
   Observations                                                                                              […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                 […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 158 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam and Lisbon (CAC 40, BEL20, AEX
   and the PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of
   GDP per capita is omitted because of collinearity. The regression without log of annual GDP per capita yields the same
   results and therefore is not reported.
EN                                                               385                                                              EN

   Figure 20: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on 20 day historical
   volatility 1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 12)
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
   Note: The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the
   Frankfurt exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS,
   per capita annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy
   variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of 20 day historical
   volatility.
      1.3.3.      Individual regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
       1.3.3.1. PARIS
   Table 13: Regressions on volatility of large caps in Paris - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(volatility)                                                                                             Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                     […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                            […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                                           […]*
                                                                                                               […]*
EN                                                               386                                                                EN

   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                    […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                        […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                         […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Constant                                                                                               […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                       […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                 […]*
   Observations                                                                                           […]*
   R-squared                                                                                              […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 51 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Paris (CAC 40) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita is omitted from the second regression
   because of collinearity.
EN                                                            387                                                             EN

   Figure 21: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on volatility 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                       ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of 20 day historical volatility.
   The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The
   first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the
   third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
        1.3.3.2. AMSTERDAM
   Table 14: Regressions on volatility of large caps in Amsterdam - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(volatility)                                                                                      Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                              […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                     […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                                    […]*
EN                                                               388                                                               EN

                                                                                                      […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                    […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                     […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
   Constant                                                                                           […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                   […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                             […]*
   Observations                                                                                       […]*
   R-squared                                                                                          […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 45 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Amsterdam (AEX) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita is omitted because of collinearity from
   the first regression.
EN                                                             389                                                              EN

   Figure 22: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on volatility 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 14)
   [                                                                                                                       ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of 20 day historical volatility.
   The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The
   first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the
   third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               390                                                               EN

       1.3.3.3. BRUSSELS
   Table 15: Regressions on volatility of large caps in Brussels - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(volatility)                                                                                       Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                              […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                     […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                                    […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                      […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                       […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   Constant                                                                                             […]*
                                                                                                        […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                     […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                               […]*
   Observations                                                                                         […]*
   R-squared                                                                                            […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 28 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Brussels (BEL 20) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita is omitted because of collinearity from
   the first regression.
EN                                                             391                                                              EN

   Figure 23: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on volatility 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 15)
   [                                                                                                                       ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of 20 day historical volatility.
   The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The
   first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the
   third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               392                                                               EN

       1.3.3.4. LISBON
   Table 16: Regressions on volatility of large caps in Lisbon - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(volatility)                                                                                           Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                   […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                          […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                       […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Last Price of security (log of)                                                                           […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Market capitalisation (log of)                                                                            […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Constant                                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                          […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                    […]*
   Observations                                                                                              […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                 […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 34 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Lisbon (PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions
   include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita and the tick size dummy is omitted because of
   collinearity from the first regression and the tick size dummy is omitted respectively from the second regression.
EN                                                              393                                                               EN

   Figure 24: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on volatility 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 16)
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP, market capitalisation and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to
   control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of 20 day historical volatility.
   The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The
   first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the
   third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               394                                                               EN

       1.3.4.       Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications 20 day historical volatility
                    for individuals stock exchanges for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Figure 25: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification on 20 day
   historical volatility by stock exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, volume traded on
   the Frankfurt exchange, MTF volume, tick size dummy, the last price of the security, market capitalisation, a dummy for the
   change in tick size, a list of daily event dummies, month-and security fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the
   four exchanges. The black lines are trends fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for the different merger
   periods, and also for a different slope after 2007. The first trend slopes, that for the period before the Paris-Brussels
   integration are statistically significantly different from zero and negative for CAC. The slope of the post-merger trend is
   statistically different from zero and positive in the case of BEL and CAC. A Wald test reports that in the case of BEL and
   CAC the trend pre-merger and the first trend post merger are statistically different. The vertical lines indicate the different
   consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the
   Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon
   exchange.
EN                                                               395                                                                EN

   Figure 26: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification on 20 day
   historical volatility by stock exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 (Including log
   GDP per capita)
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, volume traded on
   the Frankfurt exchange, MTF volume, tick size dummy, the last price of the security, market capitalisation, a dummy for the
   change in tick size, log of GDP per Capita, month-and security fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the four
   exchanges. The black lines are trends fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for the different merger periods, and
   also for a different slope after 2007. The first trend slopes, that for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration are
   statistically significantly different from zero and negative in the case of BEL, CAC and PSI. The slope of the post-merger
   trend is statistically different from zero and positive in the case of AEX, BEL, and CAC and negative in the case of PSI. A
   Wald test reports that in the case of BEL and CAC the trend pre-merger and the first trend post merger are statistically
   different. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
     1.4. TURNOVER
   (9)      Daily turnover for each security i is computed using data provided by Bloomberg as
                                                             Number of traded sharesi
                                    Turnoveri =
                                                     Market capitalization i
                                                                                    Closing prices i
EN                                                                  396                                                              EN

      1.4.1.     Year-month fixed effects for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Figure 27: Year-month fixed effects on Turnover respectively for CAC-40, BEL-20,
   AEX and PSI securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                  ]*
   Note: The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
      1.4.2.     Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Table 17: Regressions on Turnover of large caps in Paris, Amsterdam, Brussels and
   Lisbon- pooled regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-
   31/12/2010
   Ln(turnover)                                                                                       Reg1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                            […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                   […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                                  […]*
                                                                                                      […]*
EN                                                            397                                                          EN

   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                        […]*
                                                                                                              […]*
   Constant                                                                                                   […]*
                                                                                                              […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                           […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                     […]*
   Observations                                                                                               […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                  […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 158 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam and Lisbon (CAC 40, BEL20, AEX
   and the PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of
   GDP per capita is omitted from the regression because of collinearity.
   Figure 28: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on Turnover 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 17)
   [                                                                                                                          ]*
   Note: The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the
   Frankfurt exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size and the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and
   BATS. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the
   period. The dependent variable is the log of turnover.
EN                                                               398                                                              EN

       1.4.3.       Individual regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
       1.4.3.1. PARIS
   Table 18: Regressions on Turnover of large caps in Paris - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(turnover)                                                                                           Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                 […]*
                                                                                                           […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                        […]*
                                                                                                           […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                                       […]*
                                                                                                           […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                     […]*
                                                                                                           […]*
   Constant                                                                                                […]*
                                                                                                           […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                        […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                  […]*
   Observations                                                                                            […]*
   R-squared                                                                                               […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 51 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Paris (CAC 40) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita is omitted from the regression because
   of collinearity.
EN                                                             399                                                             EN

   Figure 29: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on Turnover 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 18)
   [                                                                                                                           ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS.
   Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period.
   The dependent variable is the log of the turnover. Turnover is computed as the ratio of the number of traded shares and the
   ratio of market capitalisation and closing price. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels
   and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second
   one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
       1.4.3.2. AMSTERDAM
   Table 19: Regressions on Turnover of large caps in Amsterdam - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(turnover)                                                                                                  Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                       […]*
                                                                                                                 […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                              […]*
                                                                                                                 […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                           […]*
EN                                                               400                                                                  EN

                                                                                                              […]*
   Constant                                                                                                   […]*
                                                                                                              […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                           […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                     […]*
   Observations                                                                                               […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                  […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 45 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Amsterdam (AEX) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita and the tick size dummy are omitted
   because of collinearity.
   Figure 30: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 5 on Turnover 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 19)
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS. The
   dependent variable is the log of the turnover. Turnover is computed as the ratio of the number of traded shares and the ratio
   of market capitalisation and closing price. The tick size dummy is omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a
   number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the
   different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration
   of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the
   Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              401                                                                EN

       1.4.3.3. BRUSSELS
   Table 20: Regressions on Turnover of large caps in Brussels - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(turnover)                                                                                          Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                       […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                    […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Constant                                                                                               […]*
                                                                                                          […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                       […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                 […]*
   Observations                                                                                           […]*
   R-squared                                                                                              […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 28 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Brussels (BEL 20) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita and the tick size dummy are omitted
   because of collinearity.
EN                                                            402                                                           EN

   Figure 31: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on Turnover 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 20)
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size and the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS. The
   dependent variable is the log of the turnover. Turnover is computed as the ratio of the number of traded shares and the ratio
   of market capitalisation and closing price. The tick size dummy is omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a
   number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the
   different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration
   of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the
   Lisbon exchange.
       1.4.3.4. LISBON
   Table 21: Regressions on Turnover of large caps in Lisbon - individual regression
   including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(turnover)                                                                                             Reg.1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                                   […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   Volume traded on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                                          […]*
                                                                                                             […]*
   MTF Volume (log of)                                                                                       […]*
EN                                                              403                                                                EN

                                                                                                            […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                                        […]*
                                                                                                            […]*
   Constant                                                                                                 […]*
                                                                                                            […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                                         […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                                   […]*
   Observations                                                                                             […]*
   R-squared                                                                                                […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 34 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Lisbon (PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions
   include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) the log of GDP per capita and the tick size dummy are omitted because of
   collinearity.
   Figure 32: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 5 on Turnover 1/1/2000-
   31/12/2010 (see Table 21)
   [                                                                                                                          ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size and the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS. The
   dependent variable is the log of the turnover. Turnover is computed as the ratio of the number of traded shares and the ratio
EN                                                              404                                                               EN

   of market capitalisation and closing price. The tick size dummy is omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a
   number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the
   different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration
   of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the
   Lisbon exchange.
       1.4.4.      Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications on turnover for individuals
                   stock exchanges for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Figure 33: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification on
   turnover by stock exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, volume traded on
   the Frankfurt exchange, a dummy for the change in tick size, MTF volume, a list of daily event dummies, month-and security
   fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the four exchanges. The black lines are trends fitted to the residuals with
   different slopes allowed for the different merger periods, and also for a different slope after 2007. The first trend slopes, that
   for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration are statistically significantly different from zero and negative in the case
   of AEX. The slope of the post-merger trend is statistically different from zero and positive in the case of AEX, and PSI. A
   Wald test reports that in the case of AEX and PSI the trend pre-merger and the first trend post merger are statistically
   different. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               405                                                                  EN

   Figure 34: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification on
   turnover by stock exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 (Including log GDP per
   capita)
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, volume traded on
   the Frankfurt exchange, a dummy for the change in tick size, MTF volume, log of GDP per Capita, month-and security fixed
   effects. The regressions are run separately for the four exchanges. The black lines are trends fitted to the residuals with
   different slopes allowed for the different merger periods, and also for a different slope after 2007. The first trend slopes, that
   for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration are statistically significantly different from zero and negative in the case
   of AEX. The slope of the post-merger trend is statistically different from zero and negative in the case of BEL and CAC. A
   Wald test reports that in the case of AEX, CAC and PSI the trend pre-merger and the first trend post merger are statistically
   different. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               406                                                                  EN

     1.5. VALUE OF TRADED VOLUME
      1.5.1.     Year-month fixed effects for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Figure 35: Year-month fixed effects on value of traded volume for CAC securities for
   the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                ]*
   Note: The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
      1.5.2.     Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Table 22: Regressions on value of traded volume of large caps in Paris, Amsterdam,
   Brussels and Lisbon- pooled regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects,
   1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(value traded vol.)                                                   Reg.1                         Reg.2
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                  […]*                         […]*
                                                                            […]*                         […]*
   Traded value on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                          […]*                         […]*
                                                                            […]*                         […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                        […]*                         […]*
EN                                                            407                                                          EN

                                                                                  […]*                             […]*
   MTF value (log of)                                                             […]*                             […]*
                                                                                  […]*                             […]*
   Closing price of the security (log of)                                         […]*                             […]*
                                                                                  […]*                             […]*
   Constant                                                                       […]*                             […]*
                                                                                  […]*                             […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                               […]*                             […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                         […]*                             […]*
   Observations                                                                   […]*                             […]*
   R-squared                                                                      […]*                             […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 158 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam and Lisbon (CAC 40, BEL20, AEX
   and the PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) value of
   volume trade on MTFs (includes volumes for Chi-X Europe and BATS) and on the Frankfurt exchange calculated using the
   daily closing price of each security; (f) the log of GDP per capita is omitted because of collinearity. Therefore a regression
   excluding log of GDP per capita is not reported.
   Figure 36: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 22)
   [                                                                                                                       ]*
EN                                                               408                                                              EN

   Note: The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the
   Frankfurt exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size and the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS
   and the annual GDP per capita. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The dependent variable is the
   log of the value of traded volume. The annual GDP per capita is omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a
   number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the
   log of value of traded volume.
   Figure 37: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 2 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the
   Frankfurt exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS, the
   annual GDP per capita and the security price. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The annual
   GDP per capita is omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for
   a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of value of traded volume.
       1.5.3.       Individual regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
        1.5.3.1. PARIS
   Table 23: Regressions on value of traded volume of large caps in Paris - individual
   regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(value traded vol.)                                                       Reg.1                            Reg.2
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                      […]*                             […]*
                                                                                […]*                             […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                            […]*                             […]*
EN                                                             409                                                               EN

                                                                           […]*                          […]*
   Closing price of the                                                    […]*                          […]*
    security (log of)
                                                                           […]*                          […]*
   Traded value on the                                                     […]*                          […]*
   Frankfurt exchange
    (log of)
                                                                           […]*                          […]*
   MTF value (log of)                                                      […]*                          […]*
                                                                           […]*                          […]*
   Constant                                                                […]*                          […]*
                                                                           […]*                          […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                        […]*                          […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                  […]*                          […]*
   Observations                                                            […]*                          […]*
   R-squared                                                               […]*                          […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 51 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Paris (CAC 40) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) value of volume trade on MTFs (includes volumes for Chi-X
   Europe and BATS) and on the Frankfurt exchange calculated using the daily closing price of each security; (f) the log of
   GDP per capita is omitted from the sixth and seventh regression.
EN                                                             410                                                          EN

   Figure 38: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 23)
   [                                                                                                                   ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS and the per
   capita annual GDP. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The annual GDP per capita is omitted
   because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which
   occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam
   exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the
   integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              411                                                           EN

   Figure 39: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 2 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 23)
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS, per capita
   annual GDP and the security price. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The annual GDP per
   capita is omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of
   events which occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and
   Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one
   the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
       1.5.3.2. AMSTERDAM
   Table 24: Regressions on value of traded volume of large caps in Amsterdam -
   individual regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(value traded vol.)                                                     Reg.1                           Reg.2
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                    […]*                           […]*
                                                                              […]*                           […]*
   Closing price of the                                                       […]*                           […]*
    security (log of)
                                                                              […]*                           […]*
EN                                                               412                                                              EN

   Traded value on the                                                      […]*                         […]*
   Frankfurt exchange
    (log of)
                                                                            […]*                         […]*
   MTF value (log of)                                                       […]*                         […]*
                                                                            […]*                         […]*
   Constant                                                                 […]*                         […]*
                                                                            […]*                         […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                         […]*                         […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                   […]*                         […]*
   Observations                                                             […]*                         […]*
   R-squared                                                                […]*                         […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 45 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Amsterdam (AEX) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) value of volume trade on MTFs (includes volumes for Chi-X
   Europe and BATS) and on the Frankfurt exchange calculated using the daily closing price of each security; (f) the log of
   GDP per capita and the tick size dummy are omitted because of collinearity.
EN                                                           413                                                            EN

   Figure 40: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 24)
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS and the per
   capita annual GDP. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The annual GDP per capita and the tick
   size dummy are omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a
   list of events which occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels
   and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second
   one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                             414                                                                 EN

   Figure 41: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 2 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 24)
   [                                                                                                                           ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS, the per capita
   annual GDP and the price of security. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The annual GDP per
   capita and the tick size dummy are omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy
   variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation
   dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and
   Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
       1.5.3.3. BRUSSELS
   Table 25: Regressions on value of traded volume of large caps in Brussels - individual
   regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(value traded vol.)                                                        Reg.1                              Reg.2
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                       […]*                              […]*
                                                                                 […]*                              […]*
   Closing price of the                                                          […]*                              […]*
    security (log of)
                                                                                 […]*                              […]*
   Traded value on the                                                           […]*                              […]*
EN                                                              415                                                                  EN

   Frankfurt exchange
    (log of)
                                                                             […]*                         […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                         […]*                         […]*
                                                                             […]*                         […]*
   MTF value (log of)                                                        […]*                         […]*
                                                                             […]*                         […]*
   Constant                                                                  […]*                         […]*
                                                                             […]*                         […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                          […]*                         […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                    […]*                         […]*
   Observations                                                              […]*                         […]*
   R-squared                                                                 […]*                         […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 28 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Brussels (BEL 20) at any point throughout the period; (d) all
   regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) value of volume trade on MTFs (includes volumes for Chi-X
   Europe and BATS) and on the Frankfurt exchange calculated using the daily closing price of each security; (f) the log of
   GDP per capita and tick change dummy are omitted because of collinearity.
EN                                                           416                                                            EN

   Figure 42: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 25)
   [                                                                                                                   ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS and the per
   capita annual GDP. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The annual GDP per capita is omitted
   because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which
   occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam
   exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the
   integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              417                                                           EN

   Figure 43: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 2 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 25)
   [                                                                                                                          ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS, the per capita
   annual GDP and the price of security. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The annual GDP per
   capita and the tick size dummy are omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy
   variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation
   dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and
   Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
       1.5.3.4. LISBON
   Table 26: Regressions on value of traded volume of large caps in Lisbon - individual
   regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(value traded vol.)                                                            Reg.1                           Reg.2
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                           […]*                           […]*
                                                                                     […]*                           […]*
   Closing price of the                                                              […]*                           […]*
    security (log of)
                                                                                     […]*                           […]*
EN                                                              418                                                                  EN

   Traded value on the                                                               […]*                        […]*
   Frankfurt exchange
    (log of)
                                                                                     […]*                        […]*
   Tick change dummy                                                                 […]*                        […]*
                                                                                     […]*                        […]*
   MTF value (log of)                                                                […]*                        […]*
                                                                                     […]*                        […]*
   Constant                                                                          […]*                        […]*
                                                                                     […]*                        […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                  […]*                        […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                            […]*                        […]*
   Observations                                                                      […]*                        […]*
   R-squared                                                                         […]*                        […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (c) the sample is composed by 34 large caps.
   These are securities that have composed the main index of Lisbon (PSI) at any point throughout the period; (d) all regressions
   include a set of single-day event dummies; (e) value of volume trade on MTFs (includes volumes for Chi-X Europe and
   BATS) and on the Frankfurt exchange calculated using the daily closing price of each security; (f) the log of GDP per capita
   and the tick size dummy is omitted because of collinearity from the first and second regression.
EN                                                              419                                                               EN

   Figure 44: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 26)
   [                                                                                                                   ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS and the per
   capita annual GDP. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The annual GDP per capita is omitted
   because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which
   occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam
   exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the
   integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              420                                                           EN

   Figure 45: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 2 on value of traded volume
   1/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 26)
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value on the Frankfurt
   exchange, a dummy variable to control for the change in tick size, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS, the per capita
   annual GDP and the price of security. The dependent variable is the log of the value of traded volume. The annual GDP per
   capita is omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of
   events which occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and
   Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one
   the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               421                                                              EN

       1.5.4.      Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications value of traded volume for
                   individuals stock exchanges for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Figure 46: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification on value
   of traded volume by stock exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                     ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, traded value on the
   Frankfurt exchange, MTF value, a dummy for the change in tick size, the log of the annual GDP per capita, a list of daily
   event dummies, month-and security fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the four exchanges. The black lines
   are trends fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for the different merger periods, and also for a different slope
   after 2007. The first trend slopes, that for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration are statistically significantly
   different from zero and negative in the case of AEX, BEL and PSI and positive in the case of CAC. The slope of the post-
   merger trend is statistically different from zero and positive in the case of PSI. A Wald test reports that in the case of AEX,
   BEL, CAC and PSI the trend pre-merger and the first trend post merger are statistically different. The vertical lines indicate
   the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the
   integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration
   of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               422                                                                 EN

   Figure 47: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification on value
   of traded volume by stock exchange for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 (Including log
   of closing price of security)
   [                                                                                                                            ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, traded value on the
   Frankfurt exchange, the last price of the security, the value of MTF, a dummy for the change in tick size, log of GDP per
   Capita, month-and security fixed effects. The regressions are run separately for the four exchanges. The black lines are trends
   fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for the different merger periods, and also for a different slope after 2007.
   The first trend slopes, that for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration are statistically significantly different from zero
   and negative in the case of BEL and PSI and positive for CAC. The slope of the post-merger trend is statistically different
   from zero and negative in the case of AEX, BEL and CAC and positive in the case of PSI. A Wald test reports that in the case
   of CAC and PSI the trend pre-merger and the first trend post merger are statistically different. The vertical lines indicate the
   different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration
   of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the
   Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                                423                                                                    EN

     1.6. WEIGHTED AVERAGE BID-ASK SPREAD OF THE CAC 40
      1.6.1.     Year-month fixed effects for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   Figure 48: Year-month fixed effects on the weighted average bid-ask spread of the CAC-
   40 securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010
         [                                                                                                       ]*
   Note: The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
      1.6.2.     Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/20108
   Table 27: Regressions on the weighted average bid-ask spread of the CAC-40 securities
   pooled regression including quarter-year-index fixed effects, 1/12/2000-31/12/2010
   Ln(weighted-average spread)                                                            Reg. 1
   DAX Volatility (log of)                                                                 […]*
                                                                                           […]*
   Traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange (log of)                                        […]*
                                                                                           […]*
   Closing price of the security (log of)                                                  […]*
   8
            As the regression refers to weighted-average spread of the CAC-40 securities, the pooled and the
            individual exchange regressions yield equivalent results. Accordingly only the results of the pooled
            regressions are reported.
EN                                                            424                                                          EN

                                                                                                […]*
   Market capitalisation                                                                        […]*
                                                                                                […]*
   MTF volume (log of)                                                                          […]*
                                                                                                […]*
   Constant                                                                                     […]*
                                                                                                […]*
   Quarter-year-index fixed effects                                                             […]*
   Security fixed effects                                                                       […]*
   Observations                                                                                 […]*
   R-squared                                                                                    […]*
   Note: (a) Robust p-values in brackets; (b) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1; (b) the sample is composed by the securities
   composing the CAC-40; (c) all regressions include a set of single-day event dummies; (d) the log of GDP per capita and the
   tick size dummy are omitted because of collinearity. Therefore a regression excluding log of GDP per capita is not reported.
   Figure 49: Quarter-year-index coefficients from Regression 1 on the weighted average
   bid-ask spread of the CAC-401/1/2000-31/12/2010 (see Table 27)
   [                                                                                                                         ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from the regression. Furthermore, the Coefs_l
   and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The
EN                                                             425                                                              EN

   explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt
   exchange, market capitalisation, the last price of security, the log of annual GDP per capita, the tick size dummy and the
   MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS. The dependent variable is the log of the weighted average spread of CAC 40
   securities. The annual GDP per capita and the tick size dummy are omitted because of collinearity. Furthermore, it includes a
   number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The vertical lines indicate the
   different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration
   of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the
   Lisbon exchange.
       1.6.3.       Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications on weighted-average spread
                    of CAC-40 securities for individuals stock exchanges for the period 1/01/2000-
                    31/12/2010
   Figure 50: Monthly average residuals from the Notifying Parties' specification on
   weighted-average spread of CAC-40 securities by stock exchange for the period
   1/01/2000-31/12/2010
   [                                                                                                                           ]*
   Note: The residuals plotted are monthly averages. The control variables are the logs of DAX volatility, traded volume on
   the Frankfurt exchange, MTF volumes, a dummy for the change in tick size, a list of daily event dummies, month-and
   security fixed effects. The black lines are trends fitted to the residuals with different slopes allowed for the different merger
   periods, and also for a different slope after 2007. The first trend slopes for the period before the Paris-Brussels integration is
   statistically significantly different from zero and negative. The slope of the post-merger trend is statistically different from
   zero and positive. A Wald test reports that the trend pre-merger and the first trend post merger are statistically different. The
   vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first
   line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third
   the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                                426                                                                 EN

     1.7. ADDITIONAL GRAPHS ON LIQUIDITY MEASURES
   (10) Some of the graphs set out above present a particular change during the beginning of
         2007, while still providing insight concerning the identification problem described in
         the Decision9. The regressions used to produce these graphs employs the Notifying
         Parties preferred specification, as described in Recital (4) of the Annex. This pattern
         seems to result from the interaction between the tick size dummy and the log of MTF
         volume variable. The dummy takes value one starting from January 2007 and zero
         before. At the same time the log of the MTF volumes only takes positive values during
         the first quarter of 2007.
   (11) This Section therefore sets out the graphs plotting the regression coefficients including
         the same explanatory variables as the regressions above except for the tick size dummy.
         It is observed that the pattern observed for the beginning of 2007 no longer shows up.
         However, none of the main qualitative conclusions relevant for this Decision are
         changed.
   Figure 51: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 8 on
   normalised bid-ask spread without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Individual
   exchange regression for PSI securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                             ]*
   9
           See Figure 8, Figure 12, Figure 13, Figure 20, Figure 21, Figure 22, Figure 23, Figure 28, Figure 29,
           Figure 37 and Figure 39.
EN                                                      427                                                         EN

   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 8. Furthermore, the Coefs_l and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound
   respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX
   volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, market capitalisation
   and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which
   occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of normalised bid-ask spread. A regression including the log of
   annual GDP per capita produces the same results. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris,
   Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges,
   the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
   Figure 52: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 12 on
   volumes without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Pooled regression for the
   period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                       ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 12. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded
   volume on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, market capitalisation and the security
   price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the
   period. The dependent variable is the log of volumes. A regression including the log of annual GDP per capita produces the
   same results. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into
   Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with
   Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              428                                                             EN

   Figure 53: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 13 on
   volumes without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Individual exchange
   regression for CAC-40 securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 13. Furthermore, the Coefs_l and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound
   respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX
   volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, market capitalisation
   and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which
   occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of volumes. A regression including the log of annual GDP per
   capita produces the same results. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and
   Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one
   the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              429                                                             EN

   Figure 54: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 20 on 20 day
   historical volatility without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Pooled regression
   for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                     ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 20. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded
   volume on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, market capitalisation and the security
   price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the
   period. The dependent variable is the log of 20 day historical volatility. A regression including the log of annual GDP per
   capita produces the same results. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and
   Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one
   the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                             430                                                             EN

   Figure 55: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 21 on 20 day
   historical volatility without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Individual
   exchange regression for CAC-40 securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 21. Furthermore, the Coefs_l and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound
   respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX
   volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, market capitalisation
   and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which
   occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of 20 day historical volatility. A regression including the log of
   annual GDP per capita produces the same results. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris,
   Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges,
   the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              431                                                               EN

   Figure 56: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 22 on 20 day
   historical volatility without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Individual
   exchange regression for AEX securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 22. Furthermore, the Coefs_l and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound
   respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX
   volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, market capitalisation
   and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which
   occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of 20 day historical volatility. A regression including the log of
   annual GDP per capita produces the same results. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris,
   Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges,
   the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              432                                                               EN

   Figure 57: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 23 on 20 day
   historical volatility without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Individual
   exchange regression for BEL-20 securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                          ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Fugure 23. Furthermore, the Coefs_l and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound
   respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX
   volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS, market capitalisation
   and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which
   occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of 20 day historical volatility. A regression including the log of
   annual GDP per capita produces the same results. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris,
   Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges,
   the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              433                                                               EN

   Figure 58: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 28 on
   turnover without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Pooled regression for the
   period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                      ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 28. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded
   volume on the Frankfurt exchange and the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS. Furthermore, it includes a number of
   daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the log of
   turnover. A regression including the log of annual GDP per capita produces the same results. The vertical lines indicate the
   different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration
   of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the
   Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                             434                                                              EN

   Figure 59: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 29 on
   turnover without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Individual exchange
   regression for CAC-40 securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                       ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 29. Furthermore, the Coefs_l and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound
   respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX
   volatility, the traded volume on the Frankfurt exchange and the MTF volume for Chi-X Europe and BATS. Furthermore, it
   includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent
   variable is the log of turnover. A regression including the log of annual GDP per capita produces the same results. The
   vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first
   line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third
   the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               435                                                             EN

   Figure 60: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 37 on value
   of traded volume turnover without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Pooled
   regression for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                          ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 37. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX volatility, the traded value
   on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS and the security price. Furthermore, it includes a
   number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period. The dependent variable is the
   log of value of traded volume. A regression including the log of annual GDP per capita produces the same results. The
   vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam exchanges into Euronext. The first
   line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the integration with Amsterdam and the third
   the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                               436                                                               EN

   Figure 61: Quarter-year-index coefficients using the specification on Figure 39 on value
   of traded volume without tick size dummy as explanatory variable- Individual exchange
   regression for CAC-40 securities for the period 1/1/2000-31/12/2010.
   [                                                                                                                        ]*
   Note: The graph plots the coefficients from the quarter-year index dummies from a regression with the specification used to
   produce Figure 39. Furthermore, the Coefs_l and Coefs_u identify the parameters determining the lower and upper bound
   respectively of the 95% confidence interval. The explanatory variables (all in logs) included in this regression are the DAX
   volatility, the traded value on the Frankfurt exchange, the MTF value for Chi-X Europe and BATS and the security price.
   Furthermore, it includes a number of daily dummy variables to control for a list of events which occurred over the period.
   The dependent variable is the log of value of traded volume. A regression including the log of annual GDP per capita
   produces the same results. The vertical lines indicate the different consolidation dates of Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam
   exchanges into Euronext. The first line shows the integration of the Paris and Brussels exchanges, the second one the
   integration with Amsterdam and the third the integration of the Lisbon exchange.
EN                                                              437                                                             EN

                                                                  Table of Content
   1.    INTRODUCTION AND PROCEDURE .....................................................................................................2
   2.    THE PARTIES ..............................................................................................................................................3
   3.    THE TRANSACTION AND THE CONCENTRATION ..........................................................................4
   4.    UNION DIMENSION ...................................................................................................................................4
   5.    INTRODUCTION.........................................................................................................................................5
   6.    INVESTIGATION OF THE CASE.............................................................................................................6
   7.    CASH INSTRUMENTS ...............................................................................................................................8
      7.1.     CASH LISTING SERVICES .........................................................................................................................8
         7.1.1.       Market definition ...........................................................................................................................8
            7.1.1.1.     The implications of MiFID and the Prospectus Directive and the distinction between listing and
            admission to trading in the EEA................................................................................................................................... 8
            7.1.1.2.     Equities and/or Bond Listing services....................................................................................................... 9
            7.1.1.3.     Conclusion on market definition............................................................................................................. 11
         7.1.2.       Competitive assessment ...............................................................................................................11
            7.1.2.1.     Horizontal overlaps................................................................................................................................. 11
            7.1.2.2.     Vertical relationship................................................................................................................................ 13
      7.2.     CASH TRADING SERVICES .....................................................................................................................13
         7.2.1.       Market definition .........................................................................................................................14
            7.2.1.1.     Trading.................................................................................................................................................... 14
               7.2.1.1.1. Equity trading .................................................................................................................................... 15
                  7.2.1.1.1.1. Product market definition........................................................................................................... 15
                      7.2.1.1.1.1.1. Trading on Regulated Markets and MTFs vs OTC trading ................................................ 15
                      7.2.1.1.1.1.2. The different types of equity .............................................................................................. 15
                      7.2.1.1.1.1.3. The "home bias" of equity trading...................................................................................... 16
                  7.2.1.1.1.2. Geographic market definition .................................................................................................... 18
               7.2.1.1.2. Bonds trading..................................................................................................................................... 18
                  7.2.1.1.2.1. Product market definition........................................................................................................... 18
                  7.2.1.1.2.2. Geographic market definition .................................................................................................... 19
            7.2.1.2.     Post-trading............................................................................................................................................. 19
               7.2.1.2.1. Clearing of cash instruments.............................................................................................................. 19
                  7.2.1.2.1.1. Product market definition........................................................................................................... 19
                  7.2.1.2.1.2. Geographic market definition .................................................................................................... 20
               7.2.1.2.2. Settlement of cash instruments .......................................................................................................... 20
                  7.2.1.2.2.1. Product market definition........................................................................................................... 20
                  7.2.1.2.2.2. Geographic definition ................................................................................................................ 21
         7.2.2.       Competitive assessment ...............................................................................................................22
            7.2.2.1.     Equity trading ......................................................................................................................................... 22
               7.2.2.1.1. Company-issued equities (stocks) ...................................................................................................... 22
               7.2.2.1.2. Structured products ............................................................................................................................ 23
               7.2.2.1.3. ETFs .................................................................................................................................................. 23
               7.2.2.1.4. Conclusion ......................................................................................................................................... 24
            7.2.2.2.     Bond Trading .......................................................................................................................................... 24
            7.2.2.3.     Post-trading: Clearing ............................................................................................................................. 25
            7.2.2.4.     Post-trading: Settlement .......................................................................................................................... 25
   8.    MARKET DATA AND INDEX LICENSING..........................................................................................28
      8.1.     MARKET DEFINITION ............................................................................................................................28
EN                                                                               438                                                                                                    EN

         8.1.1.      Market data .................................................................................................................................28
         8.1.2.      Index Licensing............................................................................................................................29
      8.2.     COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT ...................................................................................................................31
         8.2.1.      Market data .................................................................................................................................31
         8.2.2.      Index licensing.............................................................................................................................32
   9.    INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS AND SERVICES......................................................33
      9.1.     MARKET DEFINITION .............................................................................................................................34
         9.1.1.      IT services....................................................................................................................................34
         9.1.2.      Software.......................................................................................................................................35
         9.1.3.      Conclusion on market definition..................................................................................................35
      9.2.     COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT ...................................................................................................................36
         9.2.1.      Exchange solutions ......................................................................................................................36
         9.2.2.      Global connectivity services ........................................................................................................36
   10.      COLLATERAL MANAGEMENT .......................................................................................................38
      10.1. MARKET DEFINITION ............................................................................................................................38
         10.1.1.     Product Market Definition...........................................................................................................38
         10.1.2.     Geographic market definition......................................................................................................40
      10.2. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT ...................................................................................................................40
   11.      DERIVATIVES ......................................................................................................................................42
      11.1. MARKET DEFINITION ............................................................................................................................42
         11.1.1.     Trading and clearing of exchange traded derivatives .................................................................42
            11.1.1.1. Introduction............................................................................................................................................. 42
               11.1.1.1.1. Trading of derivatives ...................................................................................................................... 43
               11.1.1.1.2. Clearing of derivatives..................................................................................................................... 44
               11.1.1.1.3. Link between trading and clearing in the area of derivatives ........................................................... 46
            11.1.1.2. Product and Geographic Market ............................................................................................................. 48
               11.1.1.2.1. Commission's approach to market definition ................................................................................... 48
               11.1.1.2.2. Product market................................................................................................................................. 50
                  11.1.1.2.2.1. Classification of derivatives according to the execution mode: ETDs vs OTC........................ 52
                     11.1.1.2.2.1.1. Introduction...................................................................................................................... 53
                     11.1.1.2.2.1.2. There is a range of derivatives contracts from fully standardised ETDs on one side to
                     customised OTC contracts on the other side................................................................................................ 56
                     11.1.1.2.2.1.3. Substitution between ETDs and OTC derivatives is at best limited ................................. 60
                     11.1.1.2.2.1.4. Customers that can only trade ETDs ................................................................................ 60
                     11.1.1.2.2.1.5. Customers that trade both ETDs and OTC derivatives..................................................... 66
                        a. Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 66
                        b. Only ETD lookalikes could in some circumstances be considered as directly substitutable to listed
                        products................................................................................................................................................... 67
                        c. The majority of ETDs could not be substituted by OTC contracts as OTC contracts generally have
                        different characteristics and fulfil different needs................................................................................... 72
                        d. Critical loss analysis performed by the Notifying Parties does not evidence substitutability between
                        ETDs and OTC derivatives ..................................................................................................................... 80
                        e. ETDs and OTC respond to complementary trading strategies......................................................... 81
                        f. The Notifying Parties' internal documents do not sustain the claim that substitution between ETDs
                        and OTC derivatives occurs regularly..................................................................................................... 84
                        g. Conclusion ...................................................................................................................................... 86
                     11.1.1.2.2.1.6. Existence of OTC trading platforms, broker-dealers and inter-dealer brokers does not
                     imply a competitive constraint from OTC derivatives on ETDs.................................................................. 86
                        a. OTC trading platforms make it possible to find a counterparty in the OTC market........................ 86
                        b. Broker-dealers and inter-dealer brokers focus on the OTC market and do not play a gatekeeper role
                              ........................................................................................................................................................ 88
                        c. Cscreen is a price discovery mechanism for trades agreed away from exchange ............................ 91
EN                                                                                 439                                                                                                    EN

                     d. Conclusion ...................................................................................................................................... 92
                  11.1.1.2.2.1.7. Broker-dealers cannot be included in the relevant market via supply-side substitution ... 92
              11.1.1.2.2.2. Classification of derivatives according to the underlying asset class ....................................... 93
                  11.1.1.2.2.2.1. European interest rate derivatives .................................................................................... 95
                     a. Exchange-traded interest rate derivatives are intrinsically linked to a specific currency................. 96
                     b. STIR derivatives v LTIR derivatives .............................................................................................. 97
                  11.1.1.2.2.2.2. European single equity derivatives................................................................................. 102
                  11.1.1.2.2.2.3. European equity index derivatives ................................................................................. 104
              11.1.1.2.2.3. Classification of derivatives according to their relationship with the underlying................... 106
              11.1.1.2.2.4. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 108
           11.1.1.2.3. Geographic market definition ........................................................................................................ 109
              11.1.1.2.3.1. General considerations ........................................................................................................... 109
              11.1.1.2.3.2. Exchange traded European interest rate options and futures .................................................. 111
              11.1.1.2.3.3. Exchange traded European single stock equity options and futures....................................... 112
              11.1.1.2.3.4. Exchange traded European equity index options and futures................................................. 112
     11.1.2.      Off-order book services – registration, confirmation and CCP clearing of block size ETD
     contracts ...................................................................................................................................................112
        11.1.2.1.    Product market definition...................................................................................................................... 113
        11.1.2.2.    Geographic market definition ............................................................................................................... 115
     11.1.3.      Trade registration, confirmation and central counterparty clearing services for flexible versions
     of European equity futures and options traded OTC ..................................................................................115
        11.1.3.1.    Product market definition...................................................................................................................... 115
        11.1.3.2.    Geographic market definition ............................................................................................................... 118
   11.2. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT .................................................................................................................118
     11.2.1.      Trading and clearing of exchange traded derivatives ...............................................................118
        11.2.1.1. Introduction........................................................................................................................................... 118
           11.2.1.1.1. The Commission's analytical framework ....................................................................................... 118
           11.2.1.1.2. The overall market position of the Notifying Parties ..................................................................... 120
        11.2.1.2. General parameters of competition in derivatives trading and clearing ................................................ 120
           11.2.1.2.1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 120
           11.2.1.2.2. Pricing and cost of trading of ETDs............................................................................................... 121
           11.2.1.2.3. Competition to attract liquidity and tendency of liquidity to aggregate on a single platform ........ 123
           11.2.1.2.4. Technology .................................................................................................................................... 124
           11.2.1.2.5. Product innovation......................................................................................................................... 126
           11.2.1.2.6. Process and market design ............................................................................................................. 127
        11.2.1.3. Pre-merger competition between the Notifying Parties ........................................................................ 127
           11.2.1.3.1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 127
           11.2.1.3.2. The Notifying Parties compete head-to-head and are each other's closest actual and potential
           competitors ....................................................................................................................................................... 129
           11.2.1.3.3. Competition between the Notifying Parties to introduce new products ......................................... 135
              11.2.1.3.3.1. Competition to introduce new products ................................................................................. 135
              11.2.1.3.3.2. Pricing behaviour in relation to new product launches .......................................................... 137
              11.2.1.3.3.3. Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO .......................................................................... 138
              11.2.1.3.3.4. Analysis of the Notifying Parties' claims in response to the SO ............................................ 139
              11.2.1.3.3.5. General conclusions on competition in new products ............................................................ 141
           11.2.1.3.4. Competition between the Notifying Parties in technology, process and market design................. 142
              11.2.1.3.4.1. Introduction............................................................................................................................ 142
              11.2.1.3.4.2. Competition in technology..................................................................................................... 142
              11.2.1.3.4.3. Competition in process and market design............................................................................. 145
              11.2.1.3.4.4. Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO .......................................................................... 146
              11.2.1.3.4.5. Analysis of the Notifying Parties' arguments in the response to the SO................................. 146
              11.2.1.3.4.6. Conclusions on competition in technology, process and market design................................. 148
        11.2.1.4. Competition between the Notifying Parties - European interest rate futures and options ..................... 148
           11.2.1.4.1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 148
           11.2.1.4.2. Actual competition in existing interest rate derivatives ................................................................. 149
              11.2.1.4.2.1. Introduction............................................................................................................................ 149
              11.2.1.4.2.2. STIR Derivatives based on euro interest rates........................................................................ 151
EN                                                                           440                                                                                                   EN

            11.2.1.4.2.2.1. Initial competition to establish the Euribor benchmark.................................................. 152
            11.2.1.4.2.2.2. Ongoing competition in Euribor futures......................................................................... 153
            11.2.1.4.2.2.3. Options on Euribor futures ............................................................................................. 154
            11.2.1.4.2.2.4. Commission analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the SO ................................ 156
         11.2.1.4.2.3. European interest rate derivatives providing longer term exposure ....................................... 158
            11.2.1.4.2.3.1. Competition in mid-term euro interest rates................................................................... 158
            11.2.1.4.2.3.2. Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO .................................................................. 160
            11.2.1.4.2.3.3. Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the SO .................................................... 160
         11.2.1.4.2.4. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 162
      11.2.1.4.3. Potential competition in European interest rate derivatives where one party has the bulk of the
      liquidity     ....................................................................................................................................................... 163
         11.2.1.4.3.1. Introduction............................................................................................................................ 163
         11.2.1.4.3.2. Bund-Bobl-Schatz.................................................................................................................. 164
            11.2.1.4.3.2.1. Battle of the Bund .......................................................................................................... 164
            11.2.1.4.3.2.2. EuroMTS Bond Index Futures ....................................................................................... 165
            11.2.1.4.3.2.3. Recent attempts by Liffe to challenge Eurex.................................................................. 166
            11.2.1.4.3.2.4. Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO .................................................................. 167
            11.2.1.4.3.2.5. Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the SO .................................................... 167
         11.2.1.4.3.3. Euro-BTP Futures .................................................................................................................. 168
            11.2.1.4.3.3.1. Competitive interaction .................................................................................................. 168
            11.2.1.4.3.3.2. Points made by the Notifying Parties in response to the SO .......................................... 168
            11.2.1.4.3.3.3. Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the SO .................................................... 169
         11.2.1.4.3.4. Gilts........................................................................................................................................ 170
            11.2.1.4.3.4.1. Competitive interaction .................................................................................................. 170
            11.2.1.4.3.4.2. Points made by the Notifying Parties in response to the SO .......................................... 170
            11.2.1.4.3.4.3. Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the SO .................................................... 171
         11.2.1.4.3.5. No other player could maintain sufficient competitive constraint on the merged entity post-
         merger             ............................................................................................................................................... 171
            11.2.1.4.3.5.1. CME............................................................................................................................... 172
            11.2.1.4.3.5.2. Nasdaq OMX ................................................................................................................. 178
            11.2.1.4.3.5.3. ELX................................................................................................................................ 180
            11.2.1.4.3.5.4. Other attempts at entry ................................................................................................... 181
            11.2.1.4.3.5.5. Conclusions .................................................................................................................... 182
         11.2.1.4.3.6. Conclusion on potential competition in European interest rate derivatives............................ 182
      11.2.1.4.4. Competition to introduce new products in the area of European interest rate derivatives.............. 182
         11.2.1.4.4.1. Introduction............................................................................................................................ 182
         11.2.1.4.4.2. Competition between the Notifying Parties ........................................................................... 183
         11.2.1.4.4.3. Arguments made by the Notifying Parties in response to the SO........................................... 184
         11.2.1.4.4.4. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 185
      11.2.1.4.5. Conclusion on European interest rate derivatives .......................................................................... 185
   11.2.1.5. Competition between the Notifying Parties - single stock equity options and futures .......................... 185
      11.2.1.5.1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 185
      11.2.1.5.2. Actual competition in existing products ........................................................................................ 185
         11.2.1.5.2.1. "Home" markets..................................................................................................................... 185
         11.2.1.5.2.2. Other EEA markets ................................................................................................................ 197
         11.2.1.5.2.3. Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO .......................................................................... 200
         11.2.1.5.2.4. Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the SO............................................................ 200
         11.2.1.5.2.5. Conclusions............................................................................................................................ 202
      11.2.1.5.3. Potential competition ..................................................................................................................... 203
         11.2.1.5.3.1. Introduction............................................................................................................................ 203
         11.2.1.5.3.2. No other player could maintain sufficient competitive pressure on the merged entity post-
         merger             ............................................................................................................................................... 204
            11.2.1.5.3.2.1. Entry by cash MTFs: Turquoise and BATS/Chi-X Europe ............................................ 204
         11.2.1.5.3.3. TOM ...................................................................................................................................... 205
         11.2.1.5.3.4. Conclusion on potential competition in the area of European single stock derivatives.......... 206
      11.2.1.5.4. Competition to introduce new products in the area of European single stock derivatives ............. 206
      11.2.1.5.5. Conclusion on single stock equity options and futures .................................................................. 207
   11.2.1.6. Competition between the Notifying Parties: equity indices .................................................................. 208
EN                                                                        441                                                                                                   EN

              11.2.1.6.1. Actual and potential competition in existing products ................................................................... 208
              11.2.1.6.2. Competition in product innovation ................................................................................................ 209
                 11.2.1.6.2.1. Eurostoxx vs Eurofirst ........................................................................................................... 209
                 11.2.1.6.2.2. Volatility index futures .......................................................................................................... 210
                 11.2.1.6.2.3. Index dividend futures ........................................................................................................... 210
              11.2.1.6.3. Response of the Notifying Parties to the SO.................................................................................. 211
              11.2.1.6.4. Analysis of the Notifying Parties' response to the SO.................................................................... 211
              11.2.1.6.5. Conclusion on European equity index futures and options ............................................................ 213
           11.2.1.7. Barriers to entry and expansion............................................................................................................. 213
              11.2.1.7.1. High barriers to entry and expansion into European equity and interest rate derivatives............... 214
                 11.2.1.7.1.1. Introduction............................................................................................................................ 214
                 11.2.1.7.1.2. General barrier: Open interest in fungible or correlated contracts and cross-margining ........ 215
                 11.2.1.7.1.3. Certain popular derivatives contracts are protected by IP rights: case of equity index
                 derivatives          ............................................................................................................................................... 221
                 11.2.1.7.1.4. Membership base ................................................................................................................... 223
              11.2.1.7.2. Historical attempts at entry into European exchange traded equity and interest rate futures and
              options         ....................................................................................................................................................... 224
                 11.2.1.7.2.1. Customer-sponsored entry – project Rainbow ....................................................................... 224
                 11.2.1.7.2.2. Entry by cash MTFs (example of Turquoise Derivatives) ..................................................... 226
              11.2.1.7.3. The prospect of sufficient and timely post-merger entry is unlikely.............................................. 228
              11.2.1.7.4. Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................... 229
           11.2.1.8. The Merging Parties' Customers have no countervailing buyer power and no possibilities of switching
           suppliers .............................................................................................................................................................. 229
           11.2.1.9. Conclusions on competition between the Notifying Parties in trading and clearing of exchange traded
           derivatives .............................................................................................................................................................. 232
        11.2.2.     Off-order book services – registration, confirmation and CCP clearing of block size ETD
        contracts ...................................................................................................................................................233
           11.2.2.1. Introduction........................................................................................................................................... 233
           11.2.2.2. Demand for off-order book services ..................................................................................................... 233
           11.2.2.3. Competition between the Notifying Parties .......................................................................................... 235
              11.2.2.3.1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 235
              11.2.2.3.2. Interest rate derivatives .................................................................................................................. 236
              11.2.2.3.3. Single stock options and futures .................................................................................................... 236
                 11.2.2.3.3.1. Competition in products listed by both of the Notifying Parties ............................................ 237
                 11.2.2.3.3.2. Universal stock futures........................................................................................................... 238
                 11.2.2.3.3.3. Potential competition in off-book services for European single stock futures and options .... 239
                 11.2.2.3.3.4. Additional off-book constraint from Liffe with regard to contracts listed on Eurex only ...... 239
              11.2.2.3.4. Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................... 241
        11.2.3.     Trade registration, confirmation and central counterparty clearing services for flexible versions
        of European equity futures and options traded OTC ..................................................................................241
           11.2.3.1. Introduction........................................................................................................................................... 241
           11.2.3.2. Competition between the Notifying Parties .......................................................................................... 244
              11.2.3.2.1. Extent of competitive interaction ................................................................................................... 244
              11.2.3.2.2. Competitive parameters ................................................................................................................. 247
              11.2.3.2.3. Competitors ................................................................................................................................... 248
              11.2.3.2.4. Impact of anticipated regulatory developments ............................................................................. 249
           11.2.3.3. Meaningful entry is unlikely ................................................................................................................. 250
           11.2.3.4. Points made by the Notifying Parties in their response to the SO ......................................................... 251
           11.2.3.5. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................ 252
        11.2.4.     Conclusion on derivatives..........................................................................................................253
   12.     EFFICIENCIES....................................................................................................................................254
      12.1. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................................254
      12.2. THE NOTIFYING PARTIES' EFFICIENCY CLAIMS....................................................................................257
      12.3. ASSESSMENT .......................................................................................................................................260
        12.3.1.     IT and user access cost savings .................................................................................................260
EN                                                                                  442                                                                                                   EN

           12.3.1.1. The Notifying Parties' efficiency claims ............................................................................................... 260
           12.3.1.2. Analysis ................................................................................................................................................ 261
              12.3.1.2.1. Verifiability ................................................................................................................................... 261
              12.3.1.2.2. Merger specificity.......................................................................................................................... 264
              12.3.1.2.3. Consumer benefits ......................................................................................................................... 265
           12.3.1.3. Conclusion on IT and user access cost savings ..................................................................................... 266
        12.3.2.     Collateral Savings .....................................................................................................................267
           12.3.2.1. The Notifying Parties' claims................................................................................................................ 267
           12.3.2.2. Analysis ................................................................................................................................................ 267
              12.3.2.2.1. Verifiability ................................................................................................................................... 267
              12.3.2.2.2. Merger specificity.......................................................................................................................... 271
                 12.3.2.2.2.1. The Notifying Parties' claims ................................................................................................. 272
                       a. Interoperability .............................................................................................................................. 272
                       b. Outsourcing................................................................................................................................... 272
                       c. Margin offset agreements .............................................................................................................. 273
                 12.3.2.2.2.2. Commission's assessment ...................................................................................................... 275
              12.3.2.2.3. Consumer benefits ......................................................................................................................... 277
           12.3.2.3. Conclusion on collateral savings........................................................................................................... 278
        12.3.3.     Liquidity impact on integrated cash exchanges.........................................................................279
           12.3.3.1. The Notifying Parties' claims................................................................................................................ 279
           12.3.3.2. Analysis ................................................................................................................................................ 280
              12.3.3.2.1. Verifiability ................................................................................................................................... 281
                 12.3.3.2.1.1. Inference from historical data ................................................................................................ 281
                 12.3.3.2.1.2. Identification of the impact of the mergers at the time........................................................... 289
                 12.3.3.2.1.3. Criticism on the calculation of Euro […]* million................................................................. 298
                 12.3.3.2.1.4. Results from the market investigation.................................................................................... 300
              12.3.3.2.2. Merger specificity.......................................................................................................................... 301
              12.3.3.2.3. Consumer benefits ......................................................................................................................... 301
           12.3.3.3. Conclusion on liquidity impact on integrated cash exchanges.............................................................. 302
        12.3.4.     Liquidity impact of integrated derivatives trading platforms ....................................................302
           12.3.4.1. The Notifying Parties' claims................................................................................................................ 302
           12.3.4.2. Analysis ................................................................................................................................................ 302
              12.3.4.2.1. Verifiability ................................................................................................................................... 303
                 12.3.4.2.1.1. Identification – inference from historical data ....................................................................... 303
                 12.3.4.2.1.2. Criticism of the estimation approach and the calculation of actual cost savings .................... 303
                 12.3.4.2.1.3. Liquidity measure .................................................................................................................. 305
                 12.3.4.2.1.4. Identification of the impact of the mergers at the time........................................................... 306
                 12.3.4.2.1.5. Results from the market investigation.................................................................................... 309
              12.3.4.2.2. Merger specificity.......................................................................................................................... 310
              12.3.4.2.3. Consumer benefits ......................................................................................................................... 310
           12.3.4.3. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................ 311
        12.3.5.     Economy-wide efficiencies.........................................................................................................311
        12.3.6.     Cost synergies............................................................................................................................312
      12.4. CONCLUSION ON EFFICIENCIES ............................................................................................................312
   13.     COMMITMENTS ................................................................................................................................315
      13.1. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK .................................................................................................................315
      13.2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED COMMITMENTS .................................................................................317
        13.2.1.     The Commitments of 21 November 2011 ...................................................................................317
           13.2.1.1. Substance of the proposal ..................................................................................................................... 318
              13.2.1.1.1. Divestment Commitment ............................................................................................................... 318
              13.2.1.1.2. ITPA Commitment ........................................................................................................................ 318
           13.2.1.2. Results of the first market test............................................................................................................... 320
              13.2.1.2.1. Divestment Commitment ............................................................................................................... 320
              13.2.1.2.2. ITPA Commitment ........................................................................................................................ 322
              13.2.1.2.3. Overall package ............................................................................................................................. 325
EN                                                                           443                                                                                                   EN

         13.2.2.      Commitments of 14 December 2011..........................................................................................327
            13.2.2.1.     Amended Divestment Commitment...................................................................................................... 327
            13.2.2.2.     Amended ITPA Commitment ............................................................................................................... 328
            13.2.2.3.     New interest rate software licence ........................................................................................................ 329
         13.2.3.      Notifying Parties' informal pledge to freeze trading and clearing fees for 3 years ...................330
      13.3. OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE COMMITMENTS OF 14 DECEMBER 2011.............................................330
         13.3.1.      Results of the second market test ...............................................................................................331
            13.3.1.1. Scope of the Commitments of 14 December 2011................................................................................ 332
               13.3.1.1.1. Divestment Commitment ............................................................................................................... 332
               13.3.1.1.2. ITPA Commitment ........................................................................................................................ 334
               13.3.1.1.3. Licence commitment...................................................................................................................... 336
            13.3.1.2. Viability and effectiveness of the commitments of 14 December 2011 ................................................ 337
               13.3.1.2.1. Divestment Commitment ............................................................................................................... 337
               13.3.1.2.2. ITPA Commitment ........................................................................................................................ 339
               13.3.1.2.3. Licence commitment...................................................................................................................... 341
            13.3.1.3. Attractiveness of the commitments of 14 December 2011 for new entrants ......................................... 342
               13.3.1.3.1. Divestment Commitment ............................................................................................................... 342
               13.3.1.3.2. ITPA Commitment ........................................................................................................................ 343
               13.3.1.3.3. Licence commitment...................................................................................................................... 343
         13.3.2.      Commission's assessment of the Commitments of 14 December 2011 ......................................344
            13.3.2.1.     The commitments of 14 December 2011 are insufficient in scope ....................................................... 344
            13.3.2.2.     The Commitments of 14 December 2011 are not suitable to remedy competition concerns in this case ....
                          .............................................................................................................................................................. 347
            13.3.2.3.     The Commitments of 14 December 2011 are unlikely to lead to sufficient and timely entry ............... 349
            13.3.2.4.     The Commitments of 14 December 2011 would be difficult to implement and monitor...................... 351
         13.3.3.      Commission's assessment of the informal pledge to freeze trading and clearing fees for three
         years        ...................................................................................................................................................353
      13.4. CONCLUSION .......................................................................................................................................354
   14.      CONCLUSION .....................................................................................................................................355
   1. OUTPUT FOR THE DIFFERENT LIQUIDITY MEASURES PROPOSED BY THE NOTIFYING
   PARTIES ............................................................................................................................................................357
      1.1.     BID ASK SPREAD.................................................................................................................................359
         1.1.1.       Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010...........................................................359
         1.1.2.       Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2006 (pre-MiFID) .....................................361
         1.1.3.       Individuals exchange regressions for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010...................................363
            1.1.3.1.      Paris ...................................................................................................................................................... 363
            1.1.3.2.      Amsterdam............................................................................................................................................ 365
            1.1.3.3.      Brussels................................................................................................................................................. 366
            1.1.3.4.      Lisbon ................................................................................................................................................... 368
      1.2.     VOLUMES ............................................................................................................................................372
         1.2.1.       Year-month fixed effects on volumes for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 ..............................372
         1.2.2.       Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010...........................................................372
         1.2.3.       Individual regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010......................................................374
            1.2.3.1.      Paris ...................................................................................................................................................... 374
            1.2.3.2.      Amsterdam............................................................................................................................................ 376
            1.2.3.3.      Brussels................................................................................................................................................. 378
            1.2.3.4.      Lisbon ................................................................................................................................................... 380
         1.2.4.       Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications on volumes for individuals stock exchanges
         for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 ..........................................................................................................382
      1.3.     VOLATILITY ........................................................................................................................................384
         1.3.1.       Year-month fixed effects for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 .................................................384
         1.3.2.       Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010...........................................................384
         1.3.3.       Individual regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010......................................................386
EN                                                                                     444                                                                                                   EN

         1.3.3.1.    Paris ...................................................................................................................................................... 386
         1.3.3.2.    Amsterdam............................................................................................................................................ 388
         1.3.3.3.    Brussels................................................................................................................................................. 391
         1.3.3.4.    Lisbon ................................................................................................................................................... 393
      1.3.4.      Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications 20 day historical volatility for individuals
      stock exchanges for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 ...............................................................................395
   1.4.     TURNOVER ..........................................................................................................................................396
      1.4.1.      Year-month fixed effects for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 .................................................397
      1.4.2.      Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010...........................................................397
      1.4.3.      Individual regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010......................................................399
         1.4.3.1.    Paris ...................................................................................................................................................... 399
         1.4.3.2.    Amsterdam............................................................................................................................................ 400
         1.4.3.3.    Brussels................................................................................................................................................. 402
         1.4.3.4.    Lisbon ................................................................................................................................................... 403
      1.4.4.      Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications on turnover for individuals stock exchanges
      for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 ..........................................................................................................405
   1.5.     VALUE OF TRADED VOLUME ..............................................................................................................407
      1.5.1.      Year-month fixed effects for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 .................................................407
      1.5.2.      Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010...........................................................407
      1.5.3.      Individual regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010......................................................409
         1.5.3.1.    Paris ...................................................................................................................................................... 409
         1.5.3.2.    Amsterdam............................................................................................................................................ 412
         1.5.3.3.    Brussels................................................................................................................................................. 415
         1.5.3.4.    Lisbon ................................................................................................................................................... 418
      1.5.4.      Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications value of traded volume for individuals stock
      exchanges for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010.........................................................................................422
   1.6.     WEIGHTED AVERAGE BID-ASK SPREAD OF THE CAC 40......................................................................424
      1.6.1.      Year-month fixed effects for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 .................................................424
      1.6.2.      Pooled regression for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010...........................................................424
      1.6.3.      Residuals from the Notifying Parties' specifications on weighted-average spread of CAC-40
      securities for individuals stock exchanges for the period 1/01/2000-31/12/2010 .......................................426
   1.7.     ADDITIONAL GRAPHS ON LIQUIDITY MEASURES ..................................................................................427
EN                                                                              445                                                                                                   EN
