                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 28.07.1995
                                                              PUBLIC VERSION
                                                              MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                              ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                            Registered with advice of delivery
                                                            To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.611 - DRESDNER BANK/KLEINWORT BENSON
              Notification of 29.06.95 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     The above mentioned notification concerns the announced recommended cash offer
       made by Dresdner Bank AG (Dresdner) on 26 June 1995 to buy the share capital, issued
       and to be issued, of Kleinwort Benson Group plc (Kleinwort).
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of application of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and does
       not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I      THE PARTIES
3.     Dresdner is a universal bank with an extensive range of products and services covering all
       types of banking business. Most of Dresdner's turnover is achieved in Germany. Outside
       Germany, Dresdner's activities are concentrated on the investment and commercial
       banking sectors. Kleinwort is an investment bank headquartered in the City of London
       mainly active in the United Kingdom.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                              2
II  THE OPERATION
4.  On 26 June 1995, the Board of Managing Directors of Dresdner and the Board of
    Kleinwort announced the terms of a recommended final cash offer to acquire the whole of
    the share capital, issued and to be issued, of Kleinwort. The directors of Kleinwort have
    unanimously recommended all shareholders to accept the offer.
III CONCENTRATION
5.  After completion of the transaction, Dresdner will acquire control of Kleinwort. Thus, the
    operation constitutes a concentration according to Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
IV  COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.  The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of Dresdner and Kleinwort, calculated in
    accordance with Article 5(3)(a) of the Merger Regulation, exceeded 5,000 million ECU in
    the last financial year (one-tenth of total assets of Dresdner amounts to 20,791 million
    ECU, and of Kleinwort amounts to 1,174 million ECU). Both Dresdner and Kleinwort
    have community-wide turnover in excess of 250 million ECU but do not achieve more
    than two-thirds of their aggregate community-wide turnover in one and the same Member
    State. The operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V   COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
    Relevant product market
7.  Overlap only exists on the following business areas: investment banking, trading and
    broking and asset management.
8.  The investment bank activities may be grouped in different ways. The exact grouping can
    be left open since some of them stand independently and are carried out by undertakings
    not receiving the name of investment banks. For the purpose of analysis of this case
    investment bank activities comprise merger and acquisitions and privatisation advice,
    handling new issues of company equity and handling new issues of debt securities. The
    Commission has described in Case No IV/M-597 Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G.Warburg
    all these segments.
9.  Trading and broking activities comprise trading in equities, bonds, financial
    instruments/derivatives trading and foreign exchange and money market. Asset
    management involves the marketing of unit trust and provision of portfolio management
    services.
10. For the purpose of the present case it is not necessary to provide a definitive delimitation
    on the relevant product market since, on the basis of the assessment set out below, a
    dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the narrowest product
    market definition.

                                               3
    Relevant geographic market
11. It is considered that certain services such as retail banking(1) and, to a certain extent,
    investment banking(1) are limited to national or regional boundaries. These limitations are
    due to local language preferences and business cultures and, for retail banking, the fact
    that generally individual customers make use of a local branch of a bank.
12. More generally, financial markets, are in principle international in scope and the
    Commission has already concluded that "money markets trading, foreign exchange
    trading and derivative trading [are] activities whose geographic scope is international."(1)
    Nevertheless services are often provided through national outlets to local clients. For the
    purposes of the present case, however, it is not necessary to provide a definitive
    conclusion on the relevant geographic market since, on the basis of the assessment set out
    below, a dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the narrowest
    geographic market definition.
    Assessment
13. There is little product overlap between Dresdner and Kleinwort and their activities are
    geographically complementary. The new entity will rank No 15 and No 9 on the list of the
    top European banks classified by Tier 1 Capital and total assets respectively.
14. Market shares in the relevant economic sector are difficult to assess. As an alternative,
    participants in the investment banking and other financial services tend in some areas to
    rely on "league tables" designed to give an indication of relative market position and
    performance in what is a fragmented and volatile business sector. Given special
    circumstances of the case the Commission considers that "league tables" adequately
    reflect the market power of the parties.
    Investment banking activities
15. In the past three years, Kleinwort's average share on M&A advice to cross-border and
    domestic deals in which the target was UK based was 8.6%. Kleinwort's activities in
    Germany were very limited. Dresdner is a marginal player on the provision of M&A
    advice services. Kleinwort ranks 13 in the list of European privatisation assignments
    undertaken in 1994. Dresdner does not feature on this table.
16. The new entity will rank No 9 in European equity group manager league table to
    December 31, 1994. Kleinwort has not been involved at the lead manager level in the
    issue of German equity securities on that year. On the handling of new issues of debt
    securities, Dresdner is involved primarily in the issue of DM denominated debt securities
    whereas Kleinwort is involved in the issue of Sterling denominated debt securities. In the
    global Eurobond issues of any currency the position of the new entity significantly
    changes from year to year but, in 1994, was not among the 15 biggest world players.
    Trading and broking and asset management activities.
(1)
       IV/M.391 - BAI/Banca Popolare di Lecco
(2)
       IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
(3)
       IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse

                                               4
17. Trading activities of Dresdner on the German stock exchange amounted to (*) of the
    volume in 1994. Kleinwort estimates its share of agency dealing on equity securities on
    the London Stock Exchange to be (*) in the same year. On financial instruments/
    derivatives trading the new entity will be one among many other players in a highly
    fragmented market. On foreign Exchange and money market, added market shares on a
    global basis are lower than (*). An indication of the position of the new entity in the
    segment of asset management activities is given by the international league table of the
    top institutional investors outside United States, it will rank No 18 in the above mentioned
    table.
18. In view of this, the operation does not raise serious doubts about its compatibility with the
    common market.
VI  CONCLUSION
19. It follows from the above that the proposed concentration would not create or strengthen a
    dominant position as a result of which competition would be significantly impeded in the
    common market or in a substantial part of it.
                                             *   *
                                               *
20. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                         For the Commission,
(*) business secret
