                        EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                Brussels, 18.4.2011
In the published version of this decision, some                 C(2011) 2872 final
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
                                                                      MERGER PROCEDURE
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                       PUBLIC VERSION
general description.
 To the notifying party:
 Dear Sir/Madam,
 Subject:       Case No COMP/M.6164 - BARCLAYS BANK/ EGG CREDIT CARD
                ASSETS
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
 1. On 14 March 2011, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
     concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which the undertaking
     Barclays Bank PLC ("Barclays", UK) acquires, within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the
     Merger Regulation, control of parts of the undertaking Egg Banking plc ("Target", UK),
     ultimately controlled by Citigroup Inc. ("Citigroup"), by way of purchase of assets2.
 I.    THE PARTIES
 2.       Barclays is the operating company of the Barclays Group, a global financial services
          provider engaged in retail and commercial banking, credit cards, investment
          banking, wealth management and investment management services.
 3.       The Target is formed of certain credit card assets and liabilities of Egg Banking plc
          (“Egg”). The core activity of the Target is the issue and operation of credit cards in
          the UK under the Egg Card and Egg Money brands.
 1        OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty
          on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the
          replacement of "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The
          terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
 2        Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 93 of 25/03/2011, p. 26
 Commission européenne, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE / Europese Commissie, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË. Tel.: +32 229-91111.

II.  THE OPERATION
4.      The proposed transaction consists of the acquisition by Barclays of certain credit
        card assets and liabilities previously under the sole control of Egg and, ultimately,
        Citigroup, pursuant to the asset purchase agreement entered into between Barclays
        and Egg on 1 March 2011.
III. CONCENTRATION
5.      As a result of the proposed transaction, Barclays will acquire sole control of the
        whole of the Target.
6.      In view of this, the notified operation is a concentration within the meaning of
        Article 3(1) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. EU DIMENSION
7. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more than
    EUR 5 000 million (Barclays: EUR […] million; Target: EUR […] million}3. Each of
    them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (Barclays: EUR […] million;
    Target: EUR […] million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
    EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore
    has an EU dimension.
V.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
8.      The Target supplies credit cards, only in the UK, under the Egg Card and Egg
        Money brands. Horizontal overlaps with Barclays occur therefore only in respect of
        the UK market for credit cards. Barclays supplies credit cards to UK consumers
        under the "Barclaycard" brand, which is a member of the Visa and MasterCard
        networks. Barclays also co-brands credit cards with a number of partner
        organisations.4
3       Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation.
4       Barclays does not issue pure store cards. The co-branded cards issued by Barclays along with partner
        organisations like Hilton, Bhs, Intercontinental, Thomas Cook and Orange are not pure store cards.
                                                           2

A.  Product markets
    (i)       Payment card issuing
9.  In previous decisions the Commission has distinguished the issuing of payment
    cards from other payment card-related activities such as the acquiring of merchants
    and card processing.5
10. Within the activity of issuing payment cards, the Commission has considered that
    debit cards and credit/charge cards belong to separate relevant markets6 and has
    distinguished between the following:
    ¾        Credit/charge card issuing: Although the credit function differs between the
             two,7 charge cards8 and credit cards9 have been considered by the
             Commission to be part of the same relevant product market as regards the
             payment function, since both types of cards offer similar payment services.
    ¾        Universal/special purpose credit card issuing: Within the segment of
             credit/charge cards, the Commission has distinguished between universal
             cards and special purpose cards due to the difference in the payment
             functions between the two.10 Special purpose cards consist of pure store cards
             which are accepted for payment only in all commercial outlets of a given
             brand or selection of brands and within a limited geographic scope (typically
             national). Universal cards include both hybrid store cards11 and cards which
             do not have any association with particular store brands, and are
             characterised by much wider acceptance for payments at a range of
             commercial outlets. Universal cards carry the brands of payment networks
5   Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 18.
6   Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraphs 14-16.
7   Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 35.
8   Charge cards, also known as "deferred debit cards", are required to be settled on a net basis in full at
    the statement due date and do not offer credit. Statements are issued periodically, typically on a
    monthly basis. Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph
    19.
9   Credit cards in the strict sense, also referred to as "revolving credit cards", require the customer only
    to settle a fraction of the outstanding balance figuring on periodic statements of account. The
    remaining part of the outstanding balance may be carried over to the next statement period, in which
    case interest charges become due. The customer disposes of a credit facility up to a pre-arranged
    ceiling which is replenished as repayments are made on the outstanding amount. Case
    COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 19.
10  Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 27.
11  Hybrid store cards offer particular conditions or services when used in the sponsoring store or
    collection of stores, and carry a proprietary logo, but can still be used in other establishments,
    whether nationally or internationally, for which purpose they are co-branded with national or
    international payment scheme logos. Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3
    December 2008, paragraph 19.
                                                        3

            such as Visa, MasterCard, American Express and Diners Club which ensure
            their wide acceptance across a range of outlets.
    ¾       Personal/corporate credit card issuing: Corporate cards are issued to the
            employees of companies for use on company business, while personal cards
            are issued to private individuals for their personal use. The Commission has
            previously left open the question of whether personal cards and corporate
            cards belong to different relevant product markets,12 although it has noted
            that these two types of card are not substitutable from the demand side as
            they serve distinct segments of demand, carry different commercial
            conditions and corporate cards also offer certain additional services to the
            corporate customer as a whole.13
11. The Parties are of the view that a number of payment mechanisms (such as store
    cards, debit cards, cheques, cash, hire-purchase and overdrafts) may be substitutable
    for credit cards but provide information on the basis of the product market
    definitions established by the Commission.
12. The exact product market can be left open in the present case since even on the
    narrowest possible definition of the relevant market, serious doubts do not arise as to
    the compatibility of the notified transaction with the internal market.
    (ii)     Card-based consumer credit
13. At its most general, consumer credit consists in the supply of personal financing and
    other means of credit to individuals in order to purchase durable consumer goods
    (for example, cars and household equipment) as well as to finance consumption.
14. The Commission has considered14 that the provision of card-based consumer credit
    should be viewed as a separate and distinct product market from personal loans,
    which include loans sold directly via banks (personal credit) and finance at the point
    of sale (classical credit). The Commission has left open the question of whether the
    provision of card-based consumer credit should be further distinguished between
    credit offered on universal cards and credit offered on personal store cards.15
15. Although the Parties are of the view that card-based consumer credit competes with,
    at least, both personal loans and overdrafts on current accounts on the grounds that
    all of these methods can be used by customers interchangeably to satisfy a
    customer's need for short term credit, they provide information, for the purpose of
    the notification, on the basis of a relevant product market limited to card-based
    consumer credit as established by the Commission in previous decisions.
12  Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 17.
13  Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 38.
14  Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 57.
15  Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 56.
                                                4

16. The exact product market can be left open in the present case since even on the
    narrowest possible definition of the relevant market, serious doubts do not arise as to
    the compatibility of the notified transaction with the internal market.
B.  Geographic markets
17. The Commission considered in BNP Paribas/Fortis that the geographic market for
    both payment card issuing and card-based consumer credit is national16. The exact
    geographic market can, however, be left open in the present case since serious
    doubts do not arise at national level as to the compatibility of the notified transaction
    with the internal market.
C.  Competitive assessment
18. Both Parties are active in the area of issuing credit cards. In line with the
    Commission’s previous decisions, the Parties have considered credit cards and
    charge cards to be part of the same product market. The term "credit card" is used in
    the remainder of this decision to include both credit cards in the strict sense and
    charge cards. Although Barclays also issues debit cards, the Target does not.
19. Both Parties issue universal credit cards only. Barclays issues both corporate and
    personal credit cards, whereas the Target only issues personal credit cards.
20. As the Target is only active in the UK, the Parties' activities overlap in relation to the
    issuing of universal, personal credit cards in the UK. The Parties are not aware of
    any vertical links, upstream or downstream, between Barclays and the Target.
21. The Parties thus submit that the markets affected by the proposed transaction are the
    following: (i) universal credit card issuing in the UK; (ii) personal credit card issuing
    in the UK; and (iii) card-based consumer credit in the UK. On these markets, the
    Parties' market shares in 2009 were as follows:
    (i) universal credit card issuing in the UK17:
             -       Barclays:      [10-20]%
             -       Target:         [0-5]%
             -       Combined:      [20-30]%
    (ii) personal credit card issuing in the UK18:
             -       Barclays:      [10-20]%
             -       Target:         [0-5]%
16  Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 73.
17  Based on value of transactions.
18  Based on value of transactions.
                                                5

             -       Combined:         [20-30]%
    (iii) card-based consumer credit in the UK19:
             -       Barclays:         [10-20]%
             -       Target:            [0-5]%
             -       Combined:         [20-30]%
22. It follows that as a result of the proposed transaction the Parties' combined market
    shares will remain moderate in all product market segments (below 25%) and the
    increment will be low (below 5%).
23. In addition, in every market segment there would remain a significant number of
    credible competitors capable of imposing a competitive constraint on the merged
    entity. In the universal and personal credit card issuing markets, HSBC, Lloyds and
    The Royal Bank of Scotland have market shares within the range of 13-14% and a
    number of smaller actors have market shares within the range of 5-8%. In the card-
    based consumer credit market, Lloyds and MBNA have market shares of almost
    20% and HSBC and The Royal Bank of Scotland have market shares of almost 13%
    and 10% respectively.
24. Finally, the UK's OFT has found, in respect of the UK market for card issuing, that
    switching credit card providers is relatively frequent and that customers can hold
    cards from a number of providers at any one time.20 The Parties also report one new
    market entrant, Metro Bank, which started operations in July 2010 and provides
    customers with MasterCard credit cards.
25. In view of the foregoing, serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of the
    notified transaction with the internal market in any of the market segments
    considered.
19  Based on value of gross receivables at 2009 account closing.
20  OFT Report to the Secretary of State for the anticipated acquisition of Lloyds TSB plc of HBOS plc
    (24 October 2008).
                                                     6

VI. CONCLUSION
26. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
                                                  For the Commission
                                                  (signed)
                                                  Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                  Vice-President
                                              7
