                         COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 25.9.1995
                                                                       PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                           MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                          ARTICLE 6(1)b DECISION
                                                                     To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject :           Case No. IV/M.628 Generale Bank/Credit Lyonnais Nederland Bank
                    Notification of 23 August 1995 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
                    Regulation N° 4064/89
1.       This notification concerns the acquisition of control in Credit Lyonnais Bank
         Nederland NV (CLBN) the Netherlands subsidiary of the Credit Lyonnais group,
         by Generale Bank NV (G-Bank), the Belgian commercial bank.
2.       After examination of the notification the Commission has concluded that the
         proposed operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and
         does not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
         market and the EEA Agreement.
I        THE PARTIES
3.       G-Bank, a public company with limited liability incorporated under the laws of
         Belgium, is a commercial bank, with a large branch network, engaged in universal
         banking services.
4.       CLBN, a public company with limited liability incorporated under the laws of the
         Netherlands, is a commercial bank, with a branch network in the Netherlands,
         providing banking services. CLBN forms part of the Credit Lyonnais group, whole
         ultimate parent is Credit Lyonnais SA (CLSA), France. The Credit Lyonnais
         group carries out all banking operations and related services in France and abroad,
         as well as making investments in undertakings.
Rue de la Loi - 200 B-1049 Brussels, Belgium - Office: ...........
Telephone: direct line (+32-2)29....... exchange 299.11.11 . Fax: 2964301
Telex: COMEU B 21877 . Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                             2
II     THE OPERATION
5.     G-Bank will purchase 94.3% of the ordinary share capital of CLBN, which equals
       83.41% of the total share capital. In addition G-Bank will purchase the one
       priority share in the share capital of CL Pref NV (CL Pref), a Dutch investment
       company holding preference shares in CLBN. This priority share is currently
       owned by CLSA.
III    CONCENTRATION
6.     On the basis of the operation described above G-Bank will acquire control over
       CLBN and, therefore, is a concentration within the meaning Article 3 of the
       Merger Regulation.
IV     COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.     The concentration has a Community dimension within the meaning of Article 1
       of the Merger Regulation. The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of the
       parties, calculated in accordance with Article 5(3), exceeds ECU 5,000 million (G-
       Bank ECU 10,349 million, CLBN ECU 1,289 million); in addition, the aggregate
       Community-wide turnover of both parties exceeds ECU 250 million (G-Bank ECU
       9,836 million, CLBN ECU 1,018 million). Moreover, the parties do not achieve
       more than two-thirds of their Community-wide turnover within one and the same
       Member State.
V      COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
       Relevant product market
8.     The operation has an impact in the following banking sectors: retail banking,
       corporate banking and merchant banking. For the purposes of the present case,
       it is not necessary to provide a definitive conclusion on the relevant product
       markets, since a dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the
       narrowest product market definition.
       Relevant geographic market
9.     It is considered that certain services such as retail banking1 and, to a certain
       extent, investment banking2 are limited to national or regional boundaries. More
       generally, financial markets are in principle international in scope. Nevertheless,
       many services are often provided through national outlets to local clients. For the
       purposes of the present case, however, it is not necessary to provide a definitive
       conclusion on the relevant geographic market since, on the basis of the assessment
1
    IV/M.391 - BAI/Banca Popolare di Lecco
2
    IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.

                                          3
    set out below, a dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the
    narrowest geographic market definition.
    Assessment
10. With regard to retail banking CLBN's activities are essentially limited to the
    Netherlands. Its market share for the various services provided does not exceed
    10% for any particular service (and in most respects is substantially less than 5%).
    Since G-Bank's total assets in the Dutch market are only a fraction of those of
    CLBN their combined market share remains at virtually the same.
11. CLBN's activities in corporate banking are also confined to the Netherlands. Here
    again its market share for the various services provided does not exceed 10% for
    any particular service, and again the combined market share of the parties remains
    virtually the same.
12. With regard to merchant banking CLBN's activities are focused on Dutch clients
    and Dutch markets, with market shares again well below 10%. G-Bank does not
    have any activities on the Dutch market. On the Belgian market G-Bank's market
    share for financial instruments in general is below 15%. On any broader
    geographic market therefore the combined market share of the parties is
    negligible.
13. In view of the market shares resulting from the concentration and the structure of
    the various markets concerned, the operation will not create or strengthen a
    dominant position such as to impede effective competition within the common
    market.
VI  CONCLUSION
14. Based on the above findings, the proposed transaction does not raise serious
    doubts as to its compatibility with the common market.
    For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
    functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
    Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                         For the Commission,
