                        EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                Brussels, 5.9.2011
  In the published version of this decision, some               C(2011) 6353 final
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004                           PUBLIC VERSION
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                MERGER PROCEDURE
  general description.
                                                               To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.6244 – BNP Paribas/ Fortis Commercial Finance Holding
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
1. On 4 August 2011, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
      concentration pursuant to Article 4, and following a referral pursuant to Article 4(5), of
      the Merger Regulation by which the undertaking BNP Paribas (France) acquires, within
      the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation, control of the whole of the
      undertaking Fortis Commercial Finance Holding N.V. ("FCF", the Netherlands) by way
      of a purchase of shares. (BNP Paribas and FCF are designated hereinafter as the "parties
      to the proposed transaction" or simply the "Parties".)
I. THE PARTIES
2. The envisaged transaction concerns the acquisition of sole control by BNP Paribas
      Group, through its subsidiary Fortis Bank S.A./N.V. ('Fortis Bank'), over FCF.
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on the
      Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the replacement of
      "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The terminology of the TFEU will
      be used throughout this decision.
Office for Publications of the European Union
L-2985 Luxembourg

3. BNP Paribas is active in retail banking, asset management and services, corporate and
     investment banking and has operations in Europe, North and South America, Africa, the
     Middle East and Asia.
4. FCF provides factoring services including direct financing of debt portfolio, credit risk
     coverage, collection of payment from debtors and provision of administrative services
     related to the handling of invoicing of debtors. It holds 14 fully-owned subsidiaries
     active in the factoring business mostly in Europe. Moreover, FCF has a majority
     shareholding in two joint ventures also providing factoring services.
5. Prior to October 2008, FCF was a part of Fortis Bank (Nederland) N.V. ('Fortis
     Nederland') which in turn was a part of the former Fortis Bank group. On 3 October
     2008, the State of the Netherlands took control of Fortis Nederland. Fortis Nederland
     was subsequently merged with the ABN AMRO Group on 1 July 2010. As a result,
     ABN AMRO holds 100% of FCF, the ultimate majority shareholder in which is the
     Dutch State.
II. THE OPERATION
6. On 10 June 2011, Fortis Bank and FCF entered into a share purchase agreement
     pursuant to which Fortis Bank will acquire 100% of FCF with the result that FCF will
     become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Fortis Bank. FCF's Dutch subsidiary will,
     however, be carved out and its shares will be transferred to the current owner, namely
     the ABN AMRO Group.
III. CONCENTRATION
7. It follows that the notified transaction constitutes a concentration pursuant to Article
     3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. EU DIMENSION
8. On 14 June 2011, the parties to the proposed merger informed the Commission, by
     means of a reasoned submission, that the concentration is capable of being reviewed
     under the national competition laws of at least three Member States, and requested
     therefore that it should be examined by the Commission.
9. The Commission transmitted this submission to all Member States on 15 June 2011. The
     Member States competent to examine the concentration did not within 15 working days
     express their disagreement to the request for referral.
10. The case is therefore deemed to have an EU dimension pursuant to Article 4(5) of the
     Merger Regulation.
V. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
11. The notifying party submits that the transaction will not significantly impede effective
     competition within the meaning of Article 3(2) of Council Regulation 139/2004 in any
     relevant market within the EEA because (i) in horizontal overlaps the increments are not
     higher than 5%, and (ii) no vertical concerns can be identified.
                                                   2

12. According to the submissions from the acquiring party, BNP Paribas, next to its banking
    portfolio, also provides factoring services and credit insurance distribution services in a
    number of countries through its subsidiaries, namely in France, Luxembourg, Belgium,
    Italy, Spain, Portugal and (outside the EEA) in Turkey.
13. As mentioned above, FCF provides factoring services through its 14 wholly-owned
    subsidiaries, mostly in the EEA but also in Turkey and Hong Kong. Also, it acts as a
    distributor (broker) for credit risk insurance.
    PRODUCT MARKET DEFINITION
14. The notifying party submits that the parties' activities overlap horizontally in factoring
    and in credit insurance distribution. Each of these possible market definitions are
    discussed below.
    Factoring
15. The Commission in its previous decisions has defined factoring services to constitute a
    separate relevant product market. In its decisional practice, the Commission defined
    factoring as 'a financial service by which a commercial client pledges its debtors to a
    factoring company that will collect the money. Factoring comprises the purchase of all
    kinds of receivables from businesses, thereby providing customers with added liquidity.
    In this respect, it includes the ongoing purchase of short-term trade accounts receivable
    by a factoring company as well as the individual well-directed purchase of a customer's
    receivables for particular refinancing purposes'2.
16. Alongside this widely accepted definition, the Commission in its decisional practice has
    examined a couple of further approaches to factoring: (i) considering factoring to be a
    composite of several interlinked services, and (ii) discussing various types of factoring
    to potentially constitute separate relevant product markets.3 However, in all previous
    cases the exact market definitions were left open regarding any possible further
    segmentation of factoring services.
17. In support of the former approach, the notifying party submits that factoring is a
    composite service normally consisting of (i) financing, (ii) debt management, and (iii)
    credit insurance services. This approach follows the one adopted in the GE
    Capital/Heller case where the Commission stated: 'Factoring is a form of lending
    against receivables. At its most basic it involves a business ('the client') contracting to
    assign some or all of the invoices for sales made to its customers to a factoring
    company. In return the factoring company provides one or more of the following: (i) a
    pre-payment or advance on the value of the invoices; (ii) invoice collection and sales
    ledger management services; and (iii) credit insurance protecting the client against a
    customer's inability to pay an invoice within a period of time.'4 The financing
    component (pre-payment or advance on the value of the invoices) was considered in the
    light of any other working capital finance including bank credit lines, venture capital
2   Fortis/ABNAMRO, COMP/M.4844, para. 28. See also Deutsche Bank/ABNAMRO, COMP/M.5296, para.
    13; Santander/Alliance & Leicester, COMP/M.5293, para. 12; Unicredito /HVB, COMP/M.3894, para.
    29; GE Capital/Heller, COMP/M.2577, paras. 9-11.
3   As for example in Unicredito/HVB, COMP/M.3894.
4   GE Capital/Heller, COMP/2577, para. 10. Precise market definitions were left open in this case.
                                                      3

    and other5. The Commission in the case in question considered possible separate
    relevant markets for each of the components mentioned above.
18. In its subsequent cases, the Commission has also looked at whether types of factoring
    could possibly form separate relevant product markets, such as making a distinction
    between factoring provided to small and medium-sized enterprises and large corporate
    customers6. The notifying party to the present concentration submits that they provide
    various types of factoring such as (i) non-recourse factoring, (ii) recourse factoring, (iii)
    invoice discounting, (iv) discounting of bills of exchange, (v) reverse factoring, (vi)
    maturity factoring, (vii) floor-planning, (viii) inventory finance and (ix) debt
    management services. The Commission has reviewed each of the possible sub-
    segmentations outlined above.
19. Moreover, the notifying party argues that both from the demand and the supply side,
    factoring constitutes a separate market, the segmentation of which is not appropriate.
    Regarding the supply side, it is argued that various types of factoring can be provided
    with the same pool of expertise and, therefore, factoring companies can offer any of the
    type of factoring outlined above. From the demand side it is argued that usually all of
    the components (financing, debt management, credit insurance) are needed in order to
    offer a meaningful end service.
20. However, the precise market definitions can be left open in this case as serious doubts
    do not arise as to the compatibility of the notified transaction with the internal market,
    regardless of the exact market definition adopted.
    Credit insurance distribution
21. The notifying party has indicated that both entities are offering third party credit
    insurance and, thus, are active in credit risk insurance distribution. Previously the
    Commission has dealt with credit risk insurance7 and distribution of insurance products8.
    However, as serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of the notified
    transaction with the internal market in this case irrespective of the market definition
    chosen, the precise market definition can be left open.
    GEOGRAPHIC MARKET DEFINITION
22. In its previous decisions, the Commission defined factoring services to be national in
    scope9. The notifying party to this concentration does not contest this view, which is
    also consistent with the results of the market investigation in the present case.
    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
23. According to the information submitted by the parties, the transaction would have only a
    limited impact on the market in the 6 Member States outlined above (France,
    Luxembourg, Belgium, Italy, Spain and Portugal) and would not raise competition
5   GE Capital/Heller, para. 9. Also see Fortis/ABN AMRO, COMP/M.4844, para. 29.
6   Unicredito/HVB, COMP/M.3894, paras. 18-28.
7   More particularly it considered credit insurance to form a separate credit insurance market Fortis/ABN
    AMRO, COMP/M.4844, para. 30, Natexis Banques Populaires/Coface, COMP/M.2805, para. 11. See also
    Gerling/NCM, COMP/M.2602, para. 41.
8   Marsh & McLennan/Sedgwick, COMP/M.1307, para. 8 et seq.
9   Fortis/ABN AMRO, COMP/M.4844, para. 84, Natexis Banques Populaires / Coface, COMP/M.2805,
    para. 13.
                                                         4

    concerns. If the market is defined as comprising only factoring as a whole, the combined
    entity would reach the highest market shares in Belgium ([40-50%]) and Italy ([10-
    20%]). However, in both cases the increment in market share due to the transaction
    would be less than [0-5%].
24. The parties also submit that they are active in France and Luxembourg where they
    respectively have [10-20%] and [90-100%] combined market share. In regard to
    Luxembourg it should be noted that according to the notifying party BNP Paribas is not
    active there at all in factoring and, therefore, there is no increment in market share
    attributable to the proposed transaction. In addition, the notifying party argues that, due
    to its small size and other characteristics, the Luxembourg market should be regarded as
    constrained by competing offers available in the neighbouring geographical markets. In
    regard to France the combined market share remains modest.
25. Regarding a possible sub-segmentation of the factoring market into financing, debt
    management and credit insurance services, the parties' market shares seem in all cases to
    be moderate. In the case of working capital finance it would lead to an increase in BNP
    Paribas's turnover of less than [0-5%] in any of the geographical markets. With respect
    to debt management services, the parties submit that their market shares would be lower
    than those for factoring as a whole. As regards credit insurance, the parties submit that
    their market shares again would be lower than 10% percent under any market definition.
26. The notifying party has confirmed that even if various types of factoring are considered
    to constitute separate relevant product markets, their market shares will not be above
    [20-30%] for non-recourse or recourse factoring. In relation to the other types of
    products, the notifying party submits that there are no overlaps except for maturity
    factoring in Italy and discounting of bills of exchange in Belgium. BNP Paribas
    estimates that due to its limited presence in those markets, their market share remains de
    minimis.
27. In regard to credit insurance distribution in Belgium, the notifying party submits that
    both BNP Paribas and FCF have less than [0-5%] of such market10.
28. According to the Parties, although BNP Paribas entered the Belgian factoring market on
    a small scale in 2010 providing services […] in the absence of its own Belgian factoring
    subsidiary following the break-up of Fortis in 2008, the operation essentially represents
    the reintegration of the Belgian factoring activity which was lost at that time, […].
    Accordingly there would be no material reduction in competition.
29. The market investigation carried out by the Commission in the present case confirmed
    that, as argued by the Parties, the notified transaction would not lead to any material
    impact on the competitive structure of the markets in question and that there would
    remain a sufficient number of strong competitors in all national markets and all
    segments, with the vast majority of customers expressing no concerns and some
    considering that the operation would in fact result in a better factoring offer in the
    Belgian market, whilst leading to no relevant reduction in competition on the French,
    Italian or other markets.
10  BNP generated gross-written premiums of […] and FCF – […].
                                                     5

    STATE AID ISSUES
30. On 7 July 2011, the Commission services wrote to BNP Paribas indicating that the
    acquisition of FCF would not be contrary to the conditions attached to Commission
    decision C(2009) 3907 of 12 May 2009 concerning the compatibility of State Aid
    received by Fortis (N255/2009 & N274/2009). The present decision is adopted,
    however, without prejudice to applicable State Aid rules.
VI. CONCLUSION
31. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
                                                     For the Commission
                                                         (Signed)
                                                     Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                     Vice-President
                                                6
