                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 26.10.1995
                                                               PUBLIC VERSION
                                                               MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                               ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                            To the notifying parties
Subject :       Case No IV/M.642 - CHASE MANHATTAN/CHEMICAL BANKING
                Notification of 26.09.95 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     The above mentioned notification concerns the merger of Chemical Banking Corporation
       (Chemical) and The Chase Manhattan Corporation (Chase).
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of application of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and does
       not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I      THE PARTIES
3.     Chemical and Chase are two New York-based financial institutions with an extensive
       range of products covering all types of banking and financial services business. The
       dominant proportion of each bank's activities is located in the USA, where they rank
       fourth and sixth largest banking companies. The merger will create the country's largest
       banking group.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                              2
II  THE OPERATION
4.  On 28 August 1995, the Boards of Directors of the parties announced a definitive Merger
    Agreement and recommended to their respective shareholders its approval. Chase will
    merge with and into Chemical so that Chemical is the surviving corporation and Chase
    will cease to exist. Chemical will thereupon adopt the Chase name and logo. The merger
    is subject, inter alia, to the approval by the shareholders. It is anticipated that the
    shareholders meeting will be held in December 1995, and that the merger will be
    consummated as soon as possible but in any event before the end of the first quarter 1996.
III CONCENTRATION
5.  After completion of the transaction, the merger between two previously independent
    undertakings, Chemical and Chase, constitutes a concentration according to Article 3(1)(a)
    of the Merger Regulation.
IV  COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.  The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of Chemical and Chase, calculated in
    accordance with Article 5(3)(a) of the Merger Regulation, exceeded 5,000 million ECU in
    the last financial year (one-tenth of total assets of Chemical amounts to 14,411 million
    ECU, and of Chase amounts to 9,857 million ECU). Both Chemical and Chase have
    community-wide turnover in excess of 250 million ECU but do not achieve more than
    two-thirds of their aggregate community-wide turnover in one and the same Member
    State. The operation therefore has a Community dimension.
V   COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
    Relevant product market
7.  The merged entity has no presence in retail banking in EEA. Main areas of activity in
    Europe comprise investment and commercial banking and financial trading and broking.
8.  Investment and commercial bank activities may be grouped in different ways. For the
    purpose of analysis of this case investment bank activities comprise merger and
    acquisitions and privatisation advice, handling new issues of company equity and
    handling new issues of debt securities. The Commission has described in previous cases
    all these segments. (Case No IV/M.596-Mitsubishi Bank/Bank of Tokyo, Case No
    IV/M.597-Swiss Bank Corporation/S.G.Warburg, Case No IV/M.611-Dresdner
    Bank/Kleinwot Benson and other cases).
9.  Trading and broking activities comprise trading in equities and bonds, financial
    instruments/derivatives trading and foreign exchange and money market trading. Asset
    management involves the marketing of unit trust and provision of portfolio management
    services.
10. For the purpose of the present case it is not necessary to provide a definitive delimitation
    on the relevant product market since, on the basis of the assessment set out below, a

                                                      3
    dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the narrowest product
    market definition.
    Relevant geographic market
11. It is considered that certain services such as retail banking(1) and, to a certain extent,
    investment banking(1) are limited to national or regional boundaries. These limitations are
    due to local language preferences and business cultures and, for retail banking, the fact
    that generally individual customers make use of a local branch of a bank.
12. More generally, financial markets, are in principle international in scope and the
    Commission has already concluded that "money markets trading, foreign exchange
    trading and derivative trading [are] activities whose geographic scope is international."(1)
    Nevertheless services are often provided through national outlets to local clients. For the
    purposes of the present case, however, it is not necessary to provide a definitive
    conclusion on the relevant geographic market since, on the basis of the assessment set out
    below, a dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the narrowest
    geographic market definition.
    Assessment
13. Market shares in the relevant economic sector are difficult to assess. As an alternative,
    participants in the investment banking and other financial services tend in some areas to
    rely on "league tables" designed to give an indication of relative market position and
    performance in what is a fragmented and volatile business sector. The Commission
    considers that "league tables" adequately reflect the market power of the parties.
14. The amounts of assets and core capital, as defined by the Bank for International
    Settlements provide an accurate indication of the size of financial institutions for
    comparative purposes. According to a survey published by "The Banker" in July 1995
    Chemical ranked 41st and 27th respectively; Chase ranked 63rd and 37th respectively.
    The merged bank would rank 18th and 7th on these bases. However, the dominant
    proportion of each bank's activities is located in the USA. Five European countries
    (United Kingdom, Germany, Spain, France and Italy) account for [...](1) of the merged
    bank's total loans and advances to EC-based clients.
15. Although both banks are large with a global span of operations, their scale of operations in
    Europe is very much smaller than other international, regional and national universal and
    clearing banks operating within Europe with a strong domestic franchise in their home
    European markets and strong and well established client relationships
16. The merged bank would have only a [...](1) in mergers and acquisitions, a share of less
    than [...] (1)in primary debt issuance and [...](1) in primary equity issuance. Lending to
    corporate costumer will not exceed [...](1) in any member State.
(1)
       IV/M.391 - BAI/Banca Popolare di Lecco
(2)
       IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse.
(3)
       IV/M.319 - BHF/CCF/Charterhouse
(4)
       Deleted - Business secret : between 60 % and 90 %
(5)
       Deleted - Business secret : a limited position

                                                      4
17. The new entity has a limited or [...](1) on money market trading, fixed income trading and
     institutional fund management. It has no presence at all in secondary equity trading.
18. On financial instruments/derivatives trading (interest rate swaps) the new entity will be
     one among many other players in a highly fragmented and global segment. The parties'
     combined share in this segment may be estimated at [...](1). Both banks have significant
     activities in global foreign exchange dealings (including options) in the UK. Their
     combined share in this segments represents [...](10) according to a Bank of England survey.
      However they compete with other very strong players. Both Chemical and Chase are
     engaged in currency clearing in a number of Member States. In Germany both parties
     clear daily amounts representing [...](10) share of the total DM clearing. Deutsche Bank,
     Dresdner Bank and Commerzbank have still larger shares and regional banks have also
     substantial shares. Their combined segment share does not exceed 3% in any other
     Member State
19. In view of this, the operation does not raise serious doubts about its compatibility with the
     common market.
VI   CONCLUSION
20. It follows from the above that the proposed concentration would not create or strengthen a
     dominant position as a result of which competition would be significantly impeded in the
     common market or in a substantial part of it.
                                                    *   *
                                                      *
21. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
     and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
     Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                          For the Commission,
(6)
       Deleted - Business secret : less than 1 %
(7)
       Deleted - Business secret : a limited position
(8)
       Deleted - Business secret : less than 1 %
(9)
       Deleted - Business secret : a limited position
(10)
       Deleted - Business secret : between 5 % and 15 %
