                                                 2
II.  CONCENTRATION
5.   After completion of the operation, GE capital will acquire control of SOVAC. Thus the
     operation constitutes a concentration according to Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.   The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of GE Company and SOVAC, exceeded
     5,000 million ECU in the last financial year. The turnover for non-financial activities of
     GE Company amounted to ECU 35.7 billion in 1994. The turnover of Sovac, calculated in
     accordance with Article 5(3)(a) of the Merger Regulation, exceeded 484.6 million ECU.
     Both GE Capital and Sovac have community-wide turnover in excess of 250 million ECU
     but do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate community-wide turnover in
     one and the same Member State. The operation therefore has a Community dimension.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
     Relevant product market
7.   The parties offer specialist financing and related insurance services including private label
     credit cards, real estate financing, automobile and equipment financing, consumer
     financing, autofinancial services, project and structure finance, leasing, municipal bond
     insurance, life, mortgage and creditor insurance, insurance brokerage and factoring. These
     services constitute segments of broader lending, insurance or factoring activities mainly
     provided, in each case, by retail banks, insurance or factoring companies.
8.   For the purpose of the present case it is not necessary to provide a definitive delimitation of
     the relevant product market since, on the basis of the assessment set out below, a dominant
     position would not be created or reinforced even on the narrowest product market
     definition.
     Relevant geographic market
9.   Given the activities of the parties, defined broadly as lending money and insurance, the
     Commission has the view that such services are provided on a national basis(1). The
     relevant geographical markets are therefore the national markets of each Member State.
     Assessment
10. Overlap only exists in the following business areas: automobile financing; real estate
     financing; equipment financing, consumer finance and insurance. However, the respective
     activities of GE Capital and Sovac are geographically complementary except for
     automobile financing in France, Spain and Italy and equipment financing in France.
(1)
        Case IV/M.342 - Fortis/CGER
        Case IV/M.465 - GE/CIGI

                                                 3
11. In the automobile financing segment in France the new entity will have a segment share of
    [...](1). However the segment is primarily dominated by universal banks [...](1). Other
    competitors include Diac [...](1), a subsidiary of Renault; Cetelen [...](1); Credit Universel
    [...](1) and Sofinco [...](6). Segment shares for automobile financing in Spain and Italy are
    negligible [...](6). The equipment finance activities of the merged entity in France constitute
    a segment share of [...](1) on the total of outstanding loans provided by specialized
    equipment finance companies..
12. The new entity will compete in the financial services sector with banks and other stronger
    finance houses. In view of this, the operation does not raise serious doubts about its
    compatibility with the common market.
V   CONCLUSION
13. It follows from the above that the proposed concentration would not create or strengthen a
    dominant position as a result of which competition would be significantly impeded in the
    common market or in a substantial part of it.
14. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                          For the Commission,
_
(2)
       Deleted - Business secret (10 to 15 %)
(3)
       deleted - Business secret (45 to 50 %)
(4)
       Deleted - Business secret (15 à 20 %)
(5)
       Deleted - Business secret (5 to 10 %)
(6)
       Deleted - Business secret (up to 5 %)
(7)
       Deleted - Business secret (5 to 10 %)
