                       EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 04/04/2012
                                                                 C(2012)2406 final
  In the published version of this decision, some
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are                     PUBLIC VERSION
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.                                               MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:      Case No COMP/M.6521 - Talanx International/ Meiji Yasuda Life
              Insurance/ Warta
              Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
              No 139/20041
1. On 01/03/2012, the Commission received a notification pursuant to Article 4 of Council
    Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the "Merger Regulation")2 of a proposed concentration
    by which Talanx International AG and Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance Company (together
    also referred as "the Notifying Parties") acquire, within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of
    the Merger Regulation, joint control of the whole of Towarzystwo Ubezpieczen i
    Reasekuracji Warta S.A., with the exceptions of its subsidiaries Powszechne
    Towarzystwo Emerytalne WARTA S.A. and KBC Towarzystwo Funduszy
    Inwestycyjnych S.A., by way of purchase of shares.
1       OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty
        on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the
        replacement of "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The
        terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2       Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 of 20 January 2004 on the control of concentrations between
        undertakings, OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1-22.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

1.   THE PARTIES
2. Talanx International AG ("TINT") is a direct 100% subsidiary of Talanx, which in
   turn is a 100% subsidiary of the German mutual insurance company HDI V.a.G. Talanx
   provides life and non-life insurance products and is active in the market for reinsurance.
   Its activities have a worldwide scope, and it is also active in Poland.
3. Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance Company ("MY") is a Japanese insurance company,
   providing both life and non-life insurance products and to a much lesser extent
   reinsurance. Outside Japan, MY operates through subsidiaries and affiliates in Asia,
   Europe and North America. Its activities in the EEA are marginal and related to the
   reinsurance market. It is not active in Poland, whether by way of subsidiaries or
   otherwise3.
4. Towarzystwo Ubezpieczen i Reasekuracji Warta S.A. ("Warta") is a Polish insurance
   company and currently wholly owned subsidiary of KBC Verzekeringen NV, part of the
   Belgian KBC Group NV ("KBC"). It provides life and non-life insurance products to
   individual and business customers, with a focus on maritime and aviation insurance
   products. It also has a limited reinsurance business. KBC was required to sell Warta
   following the amendment of the restructuring plan that was approved by the
   Commission on 27 July 2011 in the context of the state aid procedure4. Before being
   acquired by TINT and MY, two of the current subsidiaries of Warta, Powszechne
   Towarzystwo Emerytalne WARTA S.A. ("PTE Warta") and KBC Towarzystwo
   Funduszy Inwestycyjnych S.A. ("KBC TFI"), will be transferred by Warta to another
   entity belonging to the KBC Group NV. Any references to Warta below should be
   understood to refer to the acquired entity and therefore exclude PTE Warta and KBC
   TFI.
2.   THE OPERATION
5. The notified transaction consists in the acquisition of joint control over Warta by TINT
   and MY. It is structured as follows: (i) first TINT will acquire 100% of the shares in
   Warta from KBC5; (ii) after, and subject to completion of this transaction, MY will
   acquire 30% of the shares in Warta from TINT6.
3  On 13 and 18 January 2012, TINT and MY notified to, respectively, Ukraine's Antimonopoly Committee
   and the Polish Office for Competition and Consumer Protection, a transaction by which they will acquire
   joint control over the Polish insurance company Towarzystwo Ubezpieczen Europa S.A. (“TU Europa”).
4  During the financial crisis, KBC received two recapitalisations of EUR 3.5 billion and an asset relief
   measure covering a portfolio of Collateralised Debt Obligations with a notional value of EUR 20 billion
   (the aid element was calculated at EUR 260 million). The restructuring plan of KBC was approved by the
   Commission on 19 November 2009. The amendment decision of 27 July 2011 covered the exchange of
   the 40% listing by KBC of its Czech and Hungarian business for the sale of KBC's Polish businesses
   (Warta and Kredytbank).
5  Preliminary Agreement for the Sale of Shares in Towarzystwo Ubezpieczen i Reasekuracji WARTA S.A.
   dated 19 January 2012, Annex 5_(01)_(01) (a) to the Form CO.
6  Preliminary Agreement for the Sale of Shares in Towarzystwo Ubezpieczen i Reasekuracji WARTA S.A.
   with Meiji Yasuda dated 19 January 2012, Annex 5_(01)_(02) (a) to the Form CO.
                                                        2

6. As a result of the transaction, TINT and MY will hold, respectively, 70% and 30% of the
    shares in Warta. [Description of the corporate governance regarding Warta agreed between
    TINT and MY]7.
7. [Description of the deadlock resolution mechanism regarding Warta agreed between TINT
    and MY]8.
8. Therefore, TINT and MY will acquire joint control over Warta and the notified
    transaction represents a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the
    Merger Regulation.
3.    EU DIMENSION
9. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more than
    EUR 5 000 million9 (TINT: EUR 22,869 million; MY: EUR 35,036 million; Warta: EUR
    1,129.84 million). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million
    (TINT: EUR […] million; MY: EUR […] million; Warta: EUR […] million), but they do
    not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the
    same Member State. The notified transaction therefore has an EU dimension.
4.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
      4.1. Relevant Markets
10. The notified transaction is assessed against the backdrop of acquisition by TINT and MY
    of another Polish insurer, TU Europa, primarily active in different fields to those of
    Warta. The TU Europa acquisition has been notified to the Polish competition authority.
    The assessment below assumes closing of the TU Europa transaction.
11. Warta is active in the provision of insurance products to individual and business
    customers in Poland. The Notifying Parties' activities, including those of TU Europa,
    overlap to some extent with Warta's business.
            4.1.1.     Product Market definition
12. With regard to the relevant product market, in previous decisions the Commission has
    distinguished between three broad categories of insurance products: life insurance, non-
    life insurance and reinsurance10. Within these categories, insurance products are
    intended to cover specific risks.
7   Shareholders' Agreement relating to Towarzystwo Ubezpieczen i Reasekuracji WARTA S.A. dated 19
    January 2012, Annex 5_(01)_(03) to the Form CO.
8   […].
9   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p1).
10  See for example Cases No. COMP/M.4284 - AXA/Winterthur; COMP/M.6053 - CVC/Apollo/Brit
    Insurance; COMP/M. 6217 Bâloise Holding / Nateus / Nateus Life.
                                                        3

13. From a demand side perspective, the Commission in previous decisions has noted that
    life and non-life insurance products might be sub-divided into as many product markets
    as there are different kinds of risk covered since the characteristics of individual policies
    are distinct and the insurance against a given risk is not generally substitutable with
    insurance against another risk from the consumer’s perspective11.
14. From a supply side perspective, however, the Commission has noted that certain types
    of risks are covered under similar conditions by a large number of companies which are
    simultaneously active in providing insurance against several kinds of risk, as a result of
    which it has considered that a broader product market definition might be appropriate12.
15. The Notifying Parties share the supply side considerations and do not agree with a
    narrower segmentation of the market according to the risk covered, but have provided
    market data also at this narrower level.
                           4.1.1.1.Life insurance
16. With respect to the life insurance market, the Commission has in the past looked
    separately at (i) pure protection products, (ii) pension products and (iii) investment
    products13, but also considered pension and investment products together, but in a separate
    class from pure protection products14. The Commission has, however, so far left the exact
    product market definition open.
17. The Notifying Parties point out that the classification according to the Polish Insurance
    Act does not strictly distinguish between protection, pension and insurance products.
    Rather they point out that, within some classes of insurance different types of products
    are grouped15. Therefore the Notifying Parties propose a market segmentation by
    insurance class. They have nonetheless provided market share data also for the possible
    market segments of pure risk products and investment/pension products.
18. In any event, the exact product market definition for life insurance in Poland can be left
    open in this case as the proposed transaction does not raise competition concerns
    irrespective of the market definition.
11  See for example Cases No. COMP/M.5075 - Vienna Insurance Group/EBV; COMP/M.5925 - Metlife /
    Alico / Delam; COMP/M.5083 - Groupama / OTP Garancia; COMP/M.5010, Berkshire Hathaway /
    Munich RE / GAUM; COMP/M. 6217 - Bâloise Holding / Nateus / Nateus Life.
12  See for example Cases No. COMP/M.5075 - Vienna Insurance Group / EBV; COMP/M.5728 - Crédit
    Agricole/Société Générale Asset Management; COMP/M.5925 - Metlife / Alico / Delam; Case
    COMP/M.4284 - AXA/Winterthur; COMP/M. 6217 - Bâloise Holding / Nateus / Nateus Life.
13  See Case No. COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance business.
14  See Cases No. COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV; COMP/M.5728 Crédit Agricole/Société
    Générale Asset Management; COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis.
15  In particular, the Notifying Parties note that, whilst Class 1 includes both protection products as well as
    savings-investment insurance products, Class 3 also includes savings-investment products. The difference
    between Class 1 and Class 3 is the allocation of the risk: while Class 1 products have capital guarantees,
    the insured bears the risk with regard to Class 3 products. However, customers tend to switch between
    Class 1 and Class 3 insurance products e.g. as a result of changes to the tax regime.
                                                           4

                          4.1.1.2.Non-life insurance
19. Within the non-life insurance market, the Commission has generally considered a
    distinction between the following segments: (i) accident and sickness; (ii) motor vehicle;
    (iii) property; (iv) marine, aviation and transport ("MAT"); (v) liability; (vi) credit and
    suretyship and (vii) travel16. The Notifying Parties agree with this categorization and
    discuss each of these segments.
20. The discussion below deals with those categories of insurance for which the Notifying
    Parties consider that an affected market might arise on the basis of the segmentation
    identified by the Polish Insurance Act. It does not discuss, therefore, general third party
    liability, legal protection and travel insurance, i.e. Classes 13, 17 and 18.
21. In the past, the Commission has often carried out its initial analysis on the basis of a
    segmentation by insurance class, following the classification used in the national regulatory
    framework, which transposes the relevant EU Directive17. However, where necessary and
    in particular in relation to large commercial risks, the Commission has also looked at more
    narrow possible markets18.
                               4.1.1.2.1.Accident and sickness insurance (Classes 1 and 2)
22. Whilst the Notifying Parties consider accident and sickness products as part of a single
    market, the Notifying Parties note that, according to the Polish Insurance Act two classes
    of insurance are identified, i.e. Class 1 – accident and Class 2 – Sickness. The Notifying
    Parties provide the market shares also on this basis.
23. In any event, the exact product market definition for accident and sickness insurance
    products can be left open in this case as the proposed transaction does not raise
    competition concerns irrespective of the market definition.
                               4.1.1.2.2.Motor vehicle insurance (Classes 3 and 10)
24. As regards motor vehicle insurance, the Notifying Parties note that this category comprises
    two classes of insurance, i.e. Class 3 – Overland vehicle hull insurance ("casco"), excluding
    railway, and Class 10 – Motor vehicle third party liability ("TPL") insurance. Nonetheless,
    the Notifying Parties argue that the motor vehicle insurance should be considered as a
    single market without any segmentation, but provide the market shares also for Class 3 and
    Class 10 separately.
25. Moreover the Notifying Parties claim that no segmentation exists between insurance of
    large vehicles, such as buses, trucks and off-road vehicles, on the one hand, and automobile
    and/or small commercial vehicle insurance, on the other hand; indeed, according to them,
    this segmentation would not correspond to the commercial practice and normally there
16  See for example Cases No. COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur; COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance
    Business.
17  For example with reference to the Italian market, see Cases No. COMP/M.1507 Aviva/Ubi Vita;
    COMP/M.2768 Generali/Banca Intesa/Intesa Vita; COMP/M.1712Generali/INA.
18  For example, in Case No. COMP/M.5010 Berkshire Hathaway/Munich Re/GAUM, the Commission
    looked at aerospace insurance including a possible subsegment for space and satellite risks.
                                                         5

    would be no distinction between the two groups in either the business organization, the
    distribution channels or the legal requirements.
26. In a previous case the Commission considered the motor vehicle insurance market in the
    Czech Republic. The market investigation, in that case, indicated that this market could be
    further subdivided into casco insurance and motor TPL insurance: indeed, whilst motor
    TPL insurance is obligatory for each motor vehicle, the penetration of casco insurance in
    the Czech Republic was much lower19. In another case, the Commission determined that in
    Romania, there were indications that these should be viewed as two separate markets, but
    ultimately left this question open20.
27. The market investigation, in the present case, sought to determine whether, with reference
    to the Polish market, Class 3 and Class 10 insurance products constituted separate markets
    or should be considered as parts of the same market.
28. In relation, at least, to automobiles and small commercial vehicles, it was noted that while
    certain customers demanded hull insurance in addition to liability insurance, in the vast
    majority of cases they purchased these two types of insurance from the same provider. It
    was further noted that almost all providers offered both types of insurance and that there
    were no barriers for a provider of one type also to enter the other segment. While TPL
    insurance is provided on terms defined in relevant legislation, there is a greater scope for
    differentiation of product and service offering in relation to hull insurance. Both types of
    insurance were addressed to the same customers and, if both were purchased, they were
    often purchased together at the same time. It was typically more advantageous to do so
    from the same provider than from different providers, although the latter was also
    theoretically possible and occasionally encountered.
29. It follows that, in the case of Poland, supply side considerations and product bundling
    suggest that a single market might be defined for both TPL and hull insurance for
    automobiles (including two-wheeled vehicles) and small commercial vehicles21.
30. The market investigation also looked at whether a distinction between insurance of large
    vehicles, on the one hand, and automobile and/or small commercial vehicle insurance, on
    the other hand, was appropriate and whether there was any link between hull and liability
    insurance and cargo insurance for trucks.
31. A number of elements obtained during the market investigation point to the possibility that
    such a distinction might indeed be appropriate22. Such insurance typically concerns fleets of
    vehicles rather than single vehicles, and both TPL and hull insurances are individually
    priced based on claims history and the nature of the activity carried out. This type of
    insurance is often obtained by customers through brokers and requires specialized risk
    assessment. By contrast, automobile insurance is a more commoditized product with much
    less determination of individual risk. Nonetheless the market investigation was not
19  Case No. COMP/M.4701 Generali / PPF Insurance Business.
20  Case No. COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group / EBV, recital 51.
21  Competitors unanimously expressed this view as did the majority of customers.
22  This view was expressed by the majority of both competitors and customers.
                                                        6

    conclusive as to whether or not supply side substitutability might result in a single market
    across both classes of motor vehicle.
32. The market investigation was also inconclusive as to whether a distinction should be drawn
    between TPL and hull insurance in the case of large vehicles, but indicated that these two
    types of insurance should in any case be distinguished from cargo insurance which was
    normally obtained separately.
33. In any case, each of these possible segmentations of the market can be left open for the
    purposes of the present decision since, regardless of how the market is segmented, serious
    doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of the notified transaction with the EU internal
    market.
                              4.1.1.2.3.Property insurance (Classes 8 and 9)
34. In previous cases, the Commission has generally not distinguished between property
    insurance on the basis of the origin of the risk23. The Notifying Parties note that, according
    to the Polish Insurance Act, two classes of insurance are identified within the broader
    category "property insurance", i.e. Class 8 – Natural disasters and Class 9 – Other
    property losses if the causes are not included in Class 8, but agree with the Commission's
    previous practice which tended to find that a single, overall market existed for property
    insurance. Nonetheless, the Notifying parties provide the market shares also on the basis of
    a breakdown between Classes 8 and 9.
35. The exact product market definition for property insurance can be left open in this case
    as the proposed transaction does not raise competition concerns irrespective of the
    market definition.
                              4.1.1.2.4.MAT insurance (Classes 4, 5, 6, 11 and 12)
36. In previous decisions, the Commission has considered MAT insurance as a separate
    segment within non-life insurance24, but it has also considered whether a further
    segmentation would have been possible on the basis of the means of transport25.
37. The Notifying Parties agree with the latter segmentation and note that a distinction by
    means of transport would also be in line with a number of other cases in which the
    Commission specifically investigated aviation and aerospace risks, or even sub-
    segments thereof such as, e.g., airline risks, product and airport risks, general aviation
    risks, banks/non-ownership risks (insurance of legal owners of aircrafts when these are
    not their users, e.g., banks and leasing companies), satellite and space risks.26 Moreover,
    in support of this segmentation, the Notifying Parties argue that insurance companies
23  See for example Case No. COMP/M.5075, Vienna Insurance Group / EBV, recital 56
24  See for example Cases No. COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur; COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance
    Business; COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV; COMP/M.2676 Sampo / Varma Sampo / IF
    Holding / JV; COMP/M. 6217 Bâloise Holding / Nateus / Nateus Life.
25  See for example Case No. COMP/M.2676 Sampo / Varma Sampo / IF Holding / JV.
26  See Cases No. COMP/M.5010 Berkshire Hathaway/Munich Re/GAUM; COMP/M.1017 Hannover
    Re/Skandia.
                                                      7

    that seek to offer coverage for insurance of marine and aviation risks tend to require
    specific know-how. In this respect, the Notifying Parties provided market share data
    according to the classes of the Polish Insurance Act, which identifies different classes
    according to the means of transport (Class 4 – Railway hull insurance; Class 5 –
    Aviation hull insurance; Class 6 - Marine and inland navigation hull insurance; Class 11
    – Aircraft third party liability insurance; and Class 12 Marine and inland third party
    liability insurance).
38. In the most recent case where the Commission examined whether a segmentation by
    means of transport would be appropriate, the results of the market investigation were
    inconclusive27.
39. The market investigation, in the present case, sought to determine whether the MAT
    insurance market should be further segmented according to the means of transport, and
    in particular according to the segmentation by classes proposed by the Notifying Parties.
40. In general the market investigation was inconclusive as regards supply side substitution.
    Whilst certain segments such as rail could be viewed as relatively specialized and
    characterized by a small number of buyers and providers of insurance, in other cases the
    distinction between means of transport and between hull and liability insurance
    appeared less important than a distinction based on the size of the risk. Often the size of
    the risk was also correlated with the geographical scope of the market, such that, for
    instance, in the marine segment smaller pleasure vessels, fishing vessels etc. had access
    to a market defined on national lines, whilst larger vessels could access international
    markets for insurance. In such cases, whilst there might be fewer domestic providers
    active in the market, this was usually compensated for by the possibility to purchase
    internationally.
41. In any case, the market definition for the purposes of the present case can be left open
    since, regardless of the exact market definition, the proposed transaction does not raise
    serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market.
                             4.1.1.2.5.Cargo insurance (Class 7)
42. The Notifying Parties also considered a possible separate segment and provided market
    share data for insurance Class 7, named "Cargo in transit insurance". The Notifying
    Parties note that while cargo insurance is frequently referred to in publications of the
    Polish Financial Supervision Authority and the Polish Insurance Chamber as “goods-in-
    transit insurance” ("GiT"), the risks covered under Class 7 relate to all cargo shipped
    into, from or within Poland, not just transit cargo in a strict sense, i.e. cargo neither the
    origin nor the destination of which is located in Poland. Therefore, the Notifying Parties
    refer to Class 7 in general as “cargo insurance” and not as “goods-in-transit insurance”.
    Moreover, the Notifying Parties consider this market segment as an overall market,
    without any further segmentation based on the means of transport, the type of cargo, the
    place of origin or destination, etc.
43. In a previous case, the Commission investigated cargo insurance and whether, within it,
    it was possible to identify any segmentations. Nonetheless, in that case, the market
    investigation was inconclusive28.
27  Case No. COMP/M. 6217 Bâloise Holding / Nateus / Nateus Life.
                                                       8

44. In the present case the market investigation sought to verify whether insurance Class 7
    should be further segmented taking into account the means of transport, the type of
    cargo, and the place of origin or destination (therefore distinguishing national shipments
    from cross-border and transit shipments).
45. Similar to other classes, the market investigation suggested that, for smaller risks, there
    were a number of providers of cargo insurance and low barriers to entry. In these
    instances, the type of cargo and the means of transport were not significant factors
    impeding supply-side substitutability. Such smaller risks included most purely national
    shipments. Nonetheless, both international and national shipments of dangerous or
    perishable cargo and cargo posing a risk to human health or the environment could rely
    on access to a much smaller pool of insurers able to correctly assess the specialized
    nature of these risks and with the financial standing to honour claims both for cargo loss
    but especially for third party and public prejudice.
46. In relation to international shipments, the market investigation found that the Polish section
    of the shipment would typically ultimately be insured by a Polish insurer, even if
    subcontracted under a policy covering the shipment also in other countries. Such shipments
    were governed in Poland by standard "Institute" terms whereas purely domestic shipments
    were frequently insured on bespoke national terms. In order to be competitive in providing
    end-to-end insurance, geographic scope of activity and alliances were important so that
    claims could be settled in different jurisdictions. There were therefore fewer providers of
    this type of insurance to Polish customers active internationally. For this reason a
    distinction could also be drawn between international and national shipments.
47. However, the market definition can be left open for the purposes of the present decision
    since, regardless of the market definition considered, competition concerns do not arise.
                               4.1.1.2.6. Financial insurance including credit and suretyship
                                       insurance (Classes 14 through 16)
48. As regards credit and suretyship insurance, the Commission has in previous cases
    considered a possible segmentation into the following segments: (i) delcredere insurance,
    (ii) capital goods insurance, (iii) consumer credit insurance, (iv) fidelity insurance and (v)
    guarantee insurance29. The Notifying Parties have provided market share data at the
    narrowest level.
49. The exact product market definition for credit and suretyship insurance can be left open
    in the present case as the proposed transaction does not raise competition concerns
    irrespective of the market definition.
                          4.1.1.3.Reinsurance
50. Reinsurance consists in providing insurance cover to another party (the insurer) for part or
    all of the liability assumed by it under a policy or policies of insurance which it has issued.
    It is a means of risk management, to transfer risk from the insurer to the reinsurer.
28  Case No. COMP/M. 6217 Bâloise Holding / Nateus / Nateus Life.
29  See for example Cases No. COMP/M.3786 BP/Euler Hermes/Cosec, COMP/M.2602 Gerling/NCM,
    COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance Business.
                                                       9

51. The Commission has in the past distinguished the market for reinsurance from those for life
    insurance and non-life insurance, but left open whether, within the reinsurance market, a
    further distinction between life and non-life segments should be considered, and whether,
    within the non-life segment, a segmentation according to the class of risk covered should be
    considered30.
52. The Notifying Parties, in the present case, argued for a broad product market definition
    of reinsurance, distinct from life and non-life insurance, but not itself segmented.
53. The precise market definition can be left open in this case, since the transaction does not
    raise competition concerns with respect to the reinsurance market, however segmented.
            4.1.2.    Geographic Market definition
                         4.1.2.1.Life insurance
54. As concerns life insurance, the Commission in its previous decisions has considered the
    geographic market to be national due to the different states of development of different
    national markets, differing regulatory frameworks, differing distribution structures and
    established brands31. The Notifying Parties agree with this definition of the market.
55. In any event, the geographic market definition for life insurance can be left open in the
    present case as the proposed transaction does not raise competition concerns irrespective
    of the market definition.
                         4.1.2.2.Non-life insurance
56. With regard to the geographic scope of non-life insurance markets, the Commission has
    generally considered these markets as national32, with the exception (i) of large
    commercial risks, such as the insurance of aerospace risks, which is most likely to be at
    least EEA-wide in scope33 and (ii), with respect to MAT insurance, the Commission has
    indicated that the market is likely to be wider than national for large/multinational
    corporate customers and large risk insurance respectively.34 However, the Commission
    finally left the exact scope of the geographical market open.
57. The Notifying Parties agree with the Commission's previous findings as regards the
    geographic market definition and consider that the geographic scope of the affected
    markets for non-life insurance is national, with the exception of MAT insurance,
    including cargo insurance, which in their view would be at least EEA-wide, if not
    international. In this regard they submit that international transport insurances are based
30      See for example Cases No. COMP/M.5925 MetLife / Alico / Delam; COMP/M.5083, Groupama /
        OTP Garancia; COMP/M.6053 CVC / Apollo / Brit Insurance.
31      See Cases No. COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV; COMP/M.5057 Aviva/UBI Vita.
32      See for example Case COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur.
33      See for example Case COMP/M.5010 Berkshire Hathaway / Munich RE / GAUM.
34      See for example Case COMP/M.2676 Sampo / Varma Sampo / If Holding / JV, COMP/M.4284
        AXA/Winterthur, COMP/M.1082 - Allianz / AGF; COMP/M.3556 FORTIS / BCP, COMP/M.5010
        Berkshire Hathaway / Munich RE / GAUM,
                                                   10

    on the international GATT agreement according to which the insurance of drop-
    shipment is a so called “non-admitted business”; thus insurers do not require a national
    license in order to insure drop-shipments from one country to another and therefore
    there would be no significant national differences in this segment. Moreover, in support
    of a broader geographic market definition, the Notifying Parties submit that insurances
    in this segment are sold internationally by brokers such as MARSH, AON, Willis, and
    that insurance companies sell such insurances via centralized offices, e.g. Talanx in
    Norway, Allianz in London and New York and Axa in Genua.
58. The market investigation in the present case did not fully support the position of the
    Notifying Parties, since it suggested that the geographic scope of the markets for MAT
    and cargo insurance was at least EEA-wide in the case of large risks, but nonetheless
    remained national for smaller risks and, in the case of cargo insurance, for most purely
    domestic shipments.
59. In relation to motor insurance for large commercial vehicles, if this were to be
    considered a separate market, the market investigation suggested that it would
    nonetheless also be national in scope: indeed whilst a insurance policy could cover more
    than one country, owners as regards third party liability are obliged to insure their
    vehicles in the country of registration of the vehicle and within its legal regime. Also as
    regards hull insurance, domestic claim-handling facilities are required.
60. In any event, the exact scope of the relevant geographic market for each of the classes of
    non-life insurance considered can be left open for the purposes of the present decision
    since the notified transaction does not lead to serious doubts as to its compatibility with
    the internal market, whether or not each of the markets is national or EEA-wide (or
    wider) in scope.
                         4.1.2.3.Reinsurance
61. As regards reinsurance, the Commission has previously defined this market as global,
    due to the need to pool risks on a worldwide basis35. The Notifying Parties agree with
    this definition.
62. The geographic scope of the reinsurance market can be left open for the purposes of the
    present decision since the notified transaction does not raise significant doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market regardless of whether the reinsurance market
    were to be considered at an EEA or global level.
      4.2. Competitive Assessment
63. The Notifying Parties' activities overlap horizontally, resulting in certain possible affected
    markets with respect to life and non-life insurance. Regarding reinsurance, whilst the
    transaction will not result in a horizontally affected market, in view of the vertical
    relationship with life and non-life insurance products, it would on certain possible market
    definitions be vertically affected by the notified transaction.
35      See Cases No. COMP/M.5925 MetLife / Alico / Delam; COMP/M.5083, Groupama / OTP Garancia;
        COMP/M.4059 Swiss Re / GE Insurance Solutions; COMP/M.6053 CVC / Apollo / Brit Insurance
                                                     11

              4.2.1.     Life insurance
64. As regards life insurance, the Notifying Parties' combined market share would be below
    15% on the basis of the classification under the Polish insurance act with three exceptions:
    (i) the overall market for the provision of life insurance, where the Notifying Parties would
    have achieved a combined market share of [10-20]% in 2011; (ii) Class 1, which combines
    risk and savings products, but with a capital guarantee, where the Notifying Parties' share in
    2011 would be [10-20]%; and (iii) Class 3 – Life insurance linked to capital (where the
    insured bears the investment risk), where the estimated combined share in 2011 would be
    [20-30]%. If a distinction between pure risk products and investment/pension products were
    considered, the combined market share would be above 15% ([20-30]% in 2011
    according to the Notifying Parties' estimates) in the market segment for
    investment/pension products.
65. As concerns the overall market for the provision of life insurance, given the number and
    strength of the other competitors in the possible overall market for the provision of life
    insurance products, particularly the market leader PZU Zycie S.A., which achieved a
    market share of above 30% in 2011, the transaction is unlikely at this stage to raise
    serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market: the limited <U+2206>HHI ([100-
    200] points) and the combined market share below [20-30]% would put the transaction
    within the safe harbor provided for in the Horizontal Mergers Guidelines if the market
    were to be defined at this level36. Similarly as concerns pure risk based products (a
    subset of Class 1), the Notifying Parties' combined market share would be below the level
    at which an affected market would arise.
66. The Notifying Parties would achieve a combined market share slightly above [20-30]%
    both in the possible market for investment/pension products and for Class 3 life
    insurance products. Their combined market share would remain, however, modest. In
    addition, these segments of the market are characterized by a number of other strong
    competitors. No concerns in relation to this market were raised during the procedure. It
    can therefore be considered that the proposed transaction does not give rise to serious
    doubts as to its compatibility with the EU internal market as regards investment-oriented
    life insurance products in Poland.
              4.2.2.     Non-life insurance
67. As concerns non-life insurance, the Notifying Parties' combined market share would be
    below [10-20]% under any possible market definition with the following exceptions: (i) a
    possible market for motor TPL insurance only, possibly divided further between general
    automobile and large commercial vehicle insurances (Class 10); (ii) property insurance
    (Classes 8 and 9); (iii) credit insurance (Classes 14 and 1537); and (iv) MAT insurance.
36  The delta measures changes in the HHI and is a useful proxy for the change in concentration directly
    brought about by the merger. The Commission is unlikely to identify horizontal competition concerns in a
    merger with a post merger HHI between 1000 and 2000 and a delta below 200, see Guidelines on the
    assessment of horizontal mergers under the council regulation on the control of concentrations between
    undertakings, in OJ 5.2.2004 C 31/5, para. 20.
37  In Class 17, the combined market share is [60-70]%, almost entirely due to TU Europa, but there is no increase
    as a result of the merger.
                                                          12

                         4.2.2.1. Motor third party liability insurance
68. In Class 10 as a whole the Notifying Parties achieve a combined market share of [10-20]%.
69. As concerns the market for motor TPL insurance as a whole, given the relatively moderate
    combined market share, the presence of a number of other players including the market
    leader (PZU SA, [30-40]%) and the limited <U+2206>HHI ([100-200] points), the transaction is
    unlikely to raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market. No
    concerns in this regard were raised by the market investigation or during the procedure.
70. If separate markets for automobile and large commercial vehicles were to be identified, the
    Notifying Parties indicate that their combined market share and those of their competitors
    in each of these segments would be proportional to those in the overall market for motor
    third party liability insurance (and for motor insurance as a whole) since there are no
    significant players in Poland present only in one or other of these segments or with a special
    advantage or focus thereon.
71. It follows that the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with
    the internal market, even when hypothetical separate segments for automobile and large
    commercial vehicle TPL insurance were to be considered.
                      4.2.2.2.    Property insurance
72. In Classes 8 and 9 considered together, the Notifying Parties achieve a combined market
    share [10-20] %; if Class 8 were considered as a separate market, the combined market
    share in 2011 would have amounted to [10-20]%.
73. The Notifying Parties therefore would have a relatively modest market share post-merger
    and continue to face numerous qualified competitors, including PZU ([10-20]%), Ergo
    Hestia ([5-10]%), Allianz Polska ([5-10]%), Generali ([5-10]%) and Interrisk ([0-5]%), in
    what remains a rather fragmented market.
74. It follows that the notified transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market on the Polish market for property insurance,
    whether or not divided between Classes 8 and 9.
                      4.2.2.3.    Financial insurances
75. The Notifying Parties would achieve a Class 14 combined market share of [20-30]% and
    Class 15 combined market share of [10-20]%.
76. In Class 14, the increment brought by Warta is negligible ([0-5]%) and the whole
    market share derives from TU Europa's business. In Class 15 the increment remains
    limited at [0-5]%. It follows that on any definition of the relevant market, the Notifying
    Parties would retain a relatively modest market share and continue to face a number of
    effective competitors.
77. Consequently, the notified transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market on the Polish market for credit insurance and
    suretyship, whether or not considered separately or together.
                                                     13

                       4.2.2.4.     MAT insurance
78. As concerns MAT insurance markets, if the geographic scope of these markets were to be
    wider than national, according to the data provided by the Notifying Parties, no affected
    market would arise at EEA or global level from the transaction on any segmentation by type
    of insurance.
79. The combined market share under possible sub-segments of MAT insurance in Poland is
    shown in Table 1 below (the share of MY other than via TU Europa is zero in all cases):
                          Class             Talanx         WARTA          Total
                            4                [0-5]%        [30-40]%     [30-40]%
                            5                [0-5]%        [30-40]%     [30-40]%
                            11               [0-5]%        [50-60]%     [50-60]%
                          5 + 11             [0-5]%        [40-50]%     [40-50]%
                            6                [0-5]%        [80-90]%     [80-90]%
                            12               [0-5]%       [90-100]%    [90-100]%
                          6 + 12             [0-5]%        [80-90]%     [80-90]%
                   4 + 5 + 6 + 11 + 12       [0-5]%        [60-70]%     [60-70]%
                 Source: Form CO
80. It follows that if any of these markets were to be considered national in scope, the Notifying
    Parties' combined market share would be above [30-40]% in each insurance class.
    Nonetheless, the increment following the merger is negligible and always well below [0-
    5]% (except [0-5]% for Class 11). The notified transaction therefore results only in the
    elimination of a competitor which is at best marginal and therefore leaves the market
    structure essentially unchanged.
                       4.2.2.5.     Cargo insurance
81. As concerns Class 7 overall, at national level the combined market share would amount to
    [30-40]%38, with an increment brought by Warta of [10-20]%. Nonetheless the market is
    characterised by the presence of other strong players (PZU: [20-30]%; Ergo Hestia: [10-
    20]%; Allianz: [10-20]%).
38  Of which [0-5]% via joint control with MY over TU Europa.
                                                      14

82. If the cargo insurance market were to be segmented between purely domestic shipments
    and international shipments, the market investigation indicated that certain smaller insurers
    active on the domestic segment would not be active on the international segment. As a
    result of this, the combined share of the merged entity on the international segment could be
    expected to be somewhat higher than on the solely domestic segment. Nonetheless, all the
    larger players are present in both segments and the market investigation confirmed that the
    international segment would also remain competitive, with no competition concerns raised.
83. An analogous reasoning applies in relation to a segmentation based on risk, where certain
    smaller insurers would either not be able to price the insurance risk of particularly
    dangerous cargos or would be financially unable to insure such risk. Nonetheless, all the
    main players would remain present and are able to price all types of risk in this segment
    such that the merged entity would continue to face competition from a number of viable
    competitors. Once again, no concerns were raised by the market investigation or during the
    procedure.
84. In both of the latter cases, the possibility that the relevant market might in part be wider
    than national in scope, and not captured in the available statistics, further acts to attenuate
    any possible competition concerns since, on such a wider market, the share of Warta, which
    achieves most of its business with Polish clients, would be diluted further whilst additional
    providers are present who could enter these segments of the Polish market (and indeed
    might already service certain clients in Poland without this being picked up in the available
    statistics).
85. It follows that serious doubts do not arise as to the compatibility of the notified transaction
    with the EU internal market as regards cargo insurance, however this market might be
    further subdivided.
             4.2.3.    Reinsurance
86. The Notifying Parties' combined market share in the worldwide market for reinsurance
    amounts to [10-20]%, therefore this market would not be horizontally affected as a result of
    the transaction. Nonetheless in view of the vertical relationship with life and non-life
    insurance products and given that the Notifying Parties' combined market share
    downstream would be above 25% in a certain number of market segments, the reinsurance
    market could be vertically affected.
87. Nonetheless, given the absence of horizontal concerns in all the markets where the
    combined market share would be above 25%, concerns can be excluded also with respect to
    the vertical relationship. Indeed the presence of Warta in the reinsurance market is
    extremely marginal (less than [0-5]% at worldwide level). The presence of MY is slightly
    more significant, at [0-5]%, but still remains very limited. It follows that cooperative effects
    in the sense of Article 2(4) of the Merger Regulation between Talanx and MY due to the
    acquisition of joint control over Warta can also be excluded.
5.    RELATIONSHIP WITH STATE AID RULES
88. Based on the information available, the Commission has no indication that KBC is in
    breach of any of its obligations regarding the sale of Warta within the framework of the
    State aid procedure. The present decision under the EU Merger Regulation in no way
    prejudices, however, the ongoing monitoring of KBC's implementation of its obligations in
    line with the above decision of the Commission of 27 July 2011.
                                                    15

6.   CONCLUSION
89. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
                                                  For the Commission
                                                  (signed)
                                                  Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                  Vice-President
                                             16
