                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                      Brussels, 11.12.1995
                                                                         PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                         MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                         ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                      To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.664 - GRS Holding
              Notification of 10.11.1995 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On the 10 November 1995 Nomura International plc. ("NI") notified an operation by
       which it will acquire control of Angel Train Contracts Limited ("ATC"). The transaction
       forms a first step in the UK rail privatization process.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the proposed
       operation falls within the scope of the Council Regulation No 4064/89 (the Merger
       Regulation) and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
       market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     The Operation and the Parties
3.     NI is a wholly owned subsidiary of Nomura Securities Co. Limited, an international investment bank
       based in Japan. NI's principle activities are in brokerage, trading and the underwriting of securities and the
       provision of corporate finance and investment advisory services.
4.     ATC is one of the three ROSCOS which will provide railway passenger rolling stock, through operating
       leases, to Train Operating Companies ("TOCS"). ATC is also responsible for certain heavy maintenance
       of the rolling stock.
5.     GRS Holding is the holding company of ATC and its shares are held equally by Prideaux & Associates
       Limited ("P&A") and Babcock & Brown (UK) Holdings Limited ("B&B"). P&A is a business advisory
       company providing specialist services in the merger and acquisition and project fields, with a particular
       emphasis on railway related projects. B&B is a subsidiary of Babcock & Brown Holdings Inc a specialist
       in asset financing, leasing and tax based financing advisory company, with particular specialisation in
       transport equipment.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                                        -2-
6.   The concentration consists of an acquisition of sole control of ATC by NI through GRS Holding which is
     controlled by NI by means of contractual rights conferred by a Co-operation Agreement. According to the
     Co-operation agreement, NI, will hold warrants entitling it to acquire [...] (1) of the ordinary shares of GRS
     Holding. In addition, NI may acquire shares from defaulting parties and require the other parties to sell
     their shares and/or warrants in certain circumstances. None of the other shareholders are allowed to
     dispose of any of their shares in GRS Holding without the consent of NI for a specified duration.
II.  Community Dimension
7.   The operation has a Community dimension. The worldwide turnover of all the undertakings concerned
     exceeds ECU 5 billion. In 1994/95 NI had turnover of ECU 8.3 billion (calculated in accordance with
     Article 5(3)) and ATC of ECU 373 million, of which 100% was achieved within the United Kingdom.
     The Community-wide turnover of each of at least two of the undertakings concerned exceeds ECU 250
     million and the undertakings concerned do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
     Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
III. Compatibility with the Common Market
     The relevant product market
8.   NI has submitted that the relevant product market is the provision of passenger rolling stock by way of
     operating leases. However it is necessary to consider whether the method of financing this provision is
     relevant. The provision of rolling stock through operating leases differs from the provision of rolling stock
     either through finance leasing or by outright purchase by the train operator. Operating leases are structured
     over a shorter period than the economic life of the asset and, consequently, are aimed at a shorter period of
     supply, geared to the needs of the TOCS, which have franchises limited to some 7-10 years.
9.   Finance leasing, on the other hand, is generally of a longer period and fully repays the asset cost resulting
     in the transfer of ownership of the product to the lessee. Similar considerations apply to the outright
     purchase of passenger rolling stock therefore also differentiating it from rolling stock provided on the basis
     of operating leases.
10.  However, for the purposes of this case, the question of whether the type of financing changes the
     definition of the relevant product market can be left open as, on the basis of the assessment set out below,
     a dominant position would not be created or strengthened even on the narrowest definition of the product
     market.
     The relevant geographic market
11.  The relevant geographic market is Great Britain. This is because, at present, it is understood that no
     opportunities exist in other Member States for the independent provision of passenger rolling stock to train
     operating companies. Furthermore, restrictions on the design and construction of the rolling stock and
     track make it impossible to provide passenger rolling stock designed for Great Britain without a
     fundamental redesign of the existing stock, to other Member States. Finally it should be noted that
     railways operating in Northern Ireland are, at present, excluded from the privatization process.
     Assessment
12.  The acquisition only has an impact in Great Britain and there is no overlap between the operations of NI
     and GRS Holding and ATC.
13.  Following this step in the privatization process, the provision of passenger rolling stock to the twenty-five
     TOCS will be carried out by the three ROSCOS which will have an approximate market share of 33%
     each. These market shares arise due to the fact that each ROSCO has been granted an approximately
     equal share of existing passenger rolling stock of an equal average age. Furthermore each ROSCO has
     been endowed with operating leases, of similar lengths and values, that already exist with the TOCS.
(1)
        Deleted business secret.

                                                        -3-
14. The purpose of the sale of the ROSCOS is to introduce competition into the market for the provision of
    passenger rolling stock. At the outset it may appear that competition may be restricted due to the market
    shares of the three ROSCOS and specifically of ATC. However it should be noted that the TOCS, on
    renewal of the operating leases, will be able to choose between the various providers of passenger rolling
    stock. Furthermore, there will be no regulatory restrictions or licence requirements (other than those
    appertaining to safety) preventing other operators entering the market. In this respect, and in the light of
    the Commission's enquiries, it would appear that manufacturers of passenger rolling stock may be willing,
    in the short term, to supply such equipment, on the basis of operating or finance leases, to the TOCS.
15. Consequently it is not considered that the acquisition of ATC by NI creates or strengthens a dominant
    position in the common market.
IV. Ancillary restrictions
    Non-competition clauses
16. Clauses 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 (as amended) of the Co-operation Agreement, clauses 2.2 and 3.6 of the P&A
    Consultancy Agreement and clauses 2.1, 2.2 and 3.8 of the B&B Consultancy Agreement place
    restrictions on the parties as regards the acquisition of an interest in a competitor or the provision of
    services to the same. In addition it is provided that the minority shareholders can not entice away
    employees from GRS Holding during the minority shareholders' period of beneficial interest. These
    clauses either impose periods of non-competition on the parties, of between 28 and 88 months, or periods
    limited in time to the reduction of NI's interest, in GRS Holding, to below [...] (1) or [...](2) in respect of the
    provision of services and the acquisition of an interest in a competitor or the enticing away of an
    employee.
17. The geographic dimension of these non-competition clauses is widely drawn. Whilst it is appropriate that
    such clauses should be made with respect to other ROSCOS and TOCS it is not believed to be necessary
    to exclude other lessors of rolling stock operating in the UK or all train manufacturers worldwide.
    Therefore, to the extent that these non-competition clauses operate inside Great Britain, they can be
    considered as ancillary restrictions directly related and necessary to the implementation of the
    concentration.
    Restriction on transfer of warrants
18. Clauses 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 (as amended) of the Co-operation Agreement provide that the minority
    shareholders may not, subject to certain exceptions, dispose of their warrants except with NI's consent.
    This forms a normal commercial arrangement and can be considered as an ancillary restriction directly
    related and necessary to the implementation of the concentration.
V.  Conclusion
19. For the above reasons, the Commission has concluded that the notified operation does not raise serious
    doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
    This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                                  For the Commission,
(2)
       Deleted business secret.
