                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 11.12.1995
                                                              PUBLIC VERSION
                                                              MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                              ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                            To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.669 - Charterhouse / Porterbrook
             Notification of 9.11.1995 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On the 9 November 1995, Charterhouse Development Capital Holdings Limited
       ("CDCH") notified an operation by which it will acquire control of Porterbrook Leasing
       Company Limited ("Porterbrook"). The transaction forms a first step in the UK rail
       privatization process.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the proposed
       operation falls within the scope of the Council Regulation No 4064/89 (The Merger
       Regulation) and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common
       market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     The Operation and the Parties
3.     CDCH, whose principle activity is the acquisition of interests in unlisted companies, is
       part of the Charterhouse Group whose ultimate parents are the French, Crédit
       Commercial de France SA ("CCF") and the German, Handels-und Frankfurter Bank
       ("BHF").
4.     CDCH will acquire, via Porterbrook Leasing Company MEBO Limited, its wholly owned
       subsidiary, Porterbrook. Following the operation Charterhouse Group will hold [...]1 of
       the shareholding of Porterbrook and will have sole control over this company.
(1)
       Deleted business secret.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

5.  Porterbrook is one of the three ROSCOS which will provide railway passenger rolling
    stock, through operating leases, to Train Operating Companies ("TOCS"). Porterbrook
    is also responsible for certain heavy maintenance of the rolling stock.
II. Application of Article 3(5)(c) Merger Regulation
6.  CDCH has submitted that as Porterbrook is to be acquired by "financial holding
    companies", within the meaning of Article 3(5)(c) of the Merger Regulation, the
    transaction is not notifiable.
7.  It is the view of the Commission that this interpretation of Article 3(5)(c) is
    inappropriate. "Financial holding companies" are defined in Article 5(3) of the Fourth
    Council Directive (78/660/EEC)2 of 1978 concerning the annual accounts of certain types
    of companies as being: "those companies the sole object of which is to acquire holdings
    in other undertakings, and to manage such holdings and to turn them to profit, without
    involving themselves directly or indirectly in the management of such undertakings ....
    limitations imposed on the activities of these companies must be such that compliance
    ... can be supervised by an .... authority".
8.  CDCH has submitted its Memorandum and Articles of Association to the Commission
    to support its assertion that it is a "financial holding company" and quotes clause 3(1),
    which states that one of CDCH's objects is "to carry on the business of an investment
    company". However CDCH's Memorandum of Association also shows, through 39 other
    clauses, that it may acquire shares or securities (clauses 2 and 3), lend money (clause 6),
    constitute trusts (clause 7), guarantee, support or secure (clause 9), manage, supervise
    or control businesses (clause 19), develop land (clause 22), effect insurance (clause 25)
    etc. Clearly therefore its sole object is not simply to acquire holdings in other
    undertakings and to manage such holdings and to turn them to profit as required by the
    Article 5(3) definition set out above. For these reasons it is not considered that CDCH
    forms a "financial holding company" within the meaning of the Fourth Directive and,
    therefore, the Merger Regulation.
9.  Furthermore it should be noted that the UK authorities have not taken advantage of the
    exception provided by Article 5(3) to allow "financial holding companies" to prepare
    annual accounts in a special format. This is evidenced by UK company law in general
    and the absence of the specific supervisory body required by Article 5(3) to supervise
    such companies. Consequently CDCH has not been defined as a "financial holding
    company" by UK law.
10. The second test of Article 3(5)(c) is to ascertain whether the "financial holding company"
    manages its investments simply "to maintain the full value of those investments" or
    whether it "determine[s] directly or indirectly the competitive conduct of those
    undertakings." In this respect it should be recalled that the Charterhouse Group will
    control [...]3 of the shareholding of Porterbrook; in addition, it may appoint [...]3 "special
    directors" to Porterbrook Leasing Company MEBO Limited, one of whose consent is
    necessary to permit this company to undertake certain transactions.
(2)
     OJ L 222 of 14.8.78, page 11.
(3)
    Deleted business secret.
                                                2

11. Such transactions are set out in Schedule 3, Part 2 of the Agreement relating to the
     subscription of shares in Porterbrook Leasing Company MEBO Limited. These include,
     for example, matters such as [...]4.
12. It could be argued that a number of the above consents are necessary to safeguard the
     full value of CDCH's investment. However the far more probable interpretation is that
     these restrictions can be employed in managing directly, or indirectly, the day-to-day
     business of Porterhouse.
13. For these reasons the Commission does not consider that the exemption foreseen by
     Article 3(5)(c) is appropriate in this case and that therefore the transaction is subject to
     the Merger Regulation.
III. Community Dimension
14. The operation has a Community dimension. The worldwide turnover of all the
     undertakings concerned amounted, in 1994/95, to more than ECU 5 billion. CCF has a
     worldwide turnover of ECU 5 billion and BHF ECU 3.02 billion, both calculated in
     accordance with Article 5(3), for the year ending 31 December 1994.
15. The Community-wide turnover of each of at least two of the undertakings exceeds ECU
     250 million and the undertakings concerned do not achieve more that two-thirds of their
     aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The
     Community-wide turnover for 1994/95 of the undertakings concerned was as follows:
     Porterbrook ECU [...]4, CCF ECU [...]4 and BHF ECU [...]4, the latter two calculated in
     accordance of Article 5(3).
IV. Compatibility with the Common Market
     The relevant product market
16. CDCH has submitted that the relevant product market is the provision of passenger
     rolling stock for the British railway industry. However it is also necessary to consider
     whether the method of financing this provision is relevant. Porterbrook will provide the
     rolling stock to the TOCS by way of operating leases. The provision of rolling stock
     through operating leases differs from the provision of rolling stock either through finance
     leasing or by outright purchase by the train operator. Operating leases are structured over
     a shorter period than the economic life of the asset and, consequently, are aimed at a
     shorter period of supply, geared to the needs of the TOCS, which have franchises limited
     to some 7-10 years.
17. Finance leasing, on the other hand, is generally of a longer period and fully repays the
     asset cost resulting in the transfer of ownership of the product to the lessee. Similar
     considerations apply to the outright purchase of passenger rolling stock therefore
     differentiating it from rolling stock provided on the basis of operating leases.
18. However, for the purposes of this case, the question of whether the type of financing
     changes the definition of the relevant product market can be left open as, on the basis
(4)
     Deleted business secret.
                                                3

    of the assessment set out below, a dominant position would not be created or
    strengthened even on the narrowest definition of the product market.
    The relevant geographic market
19. The relevant geographic market is Great Britain. This is because, at present, no
    opportunities exist in other Member States for the independent provision of passenger
    rolling stock to train operating companies. Furthermore, restrictions on the design and
    construction of the rolling stock and track make it impossible to provide passenger
    rolling stock designed for Great Britain without a fundamental redesign of the existing
    stock, to other Member States. Finally it should be noted that railways operating in
    Northern Ireland are, at present, excluded from the privatization process.
    Assessment
20. The acquisition only has an impact in Great Britain and there is no overlap between the
    operations of CDCH and Porterbrook.
21. Following this step in the privatization process, the provision of passenger rolling stock
    to the twenty-five TOCS will be carried out by the three ROSCOS which will have an
    approximate market share of 33% each. These market shares arise due to the fact that
    each ROSCO has been granted an approximately equal share of existing passenger rolling
    stock of an equal average age. Furthermore each ROSCO has been endowed with
    operating leases, of similar lengths and values, that already exist with the TOCS.
22. The purpose of the sale of the ROSCOS is to introduce competition into the market for
    the provision of passenger rolling stock. At the outset it may appear that competition
    may be restricted due to the market shares of the three ROSCOS and specifically of
    Porterbrook. However it should be noted that the TOCS, on renewal of the operating
    leases, will be able to choose between the various providers of passenger rolling stock.
    Furthermore, there will be no regulatory restrictions or licence requirements (other than
    those appertaining to safety) preventing other operators entering the market. In this
    respect, and in the light of the Commission's enquiries, it would appear that
    manufacturers of passenger rolling stock may be willing, in the short term, to supply
    such equipment, on the basis of operating or finance leases, to the TOCS.
23. Consequently it is not considered that the acquisition of Porterbrook by CDCH creates
    or strengthens a dominant position in the common market.
V.  Conclusion
24. For the above reasons, the Commission has concluded that the notified operation does
    not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
    functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article
    6(1)(b) of Council Regulation N° 4064/89.
                                                       For the Commission,
                                              4
