                       EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 03.08.2012
                                                                 C(2012) 5674
   In the published version of this decision, some
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
                                                                       PUBLIC VERSION
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
   general description.                                            MERGER PROCEDURE
To the notifying parties:
Subject:      Case No COMP/M.6600 - AAEC / ENTERO / BMC INVESTMENTS
              Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
              No 139/20041
Dear Sir/Madam,
1.    On 9 July 2012, the European Commission received the notification of a proposed
    concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which ABN AMRO
    Effecten Compagnie B.V. ("AAEC", the Netherlands), a wholly owned subsidiary of
    ABN AMRO Bank N.V. ("ABN AMRO", the Netherlands) and Entero B.V. ("Entero", the
    Netherlands), a wholly owned subsidiary of ING Bank N.V ("ING", the Netherlands)
    acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint control of
    BMC Investments B.V. and certain of its subsidiaries ("BMC", the Netherlands) by way of
    purchase of shares.2 (ABN AMRO and ING are designated hereinafter as the "notifying
    parties".)
2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
    operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
    doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the EEA Agreement.
I. THE PARTIES
3.    ABN AMRO and ING are large financial institutions, active in the Netherlands and
    internationally.
1   OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on the
    Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the replacement of
    "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The terminology of the TFEU will
    be used throughout this decision.
2   Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 212 19.07.2012, p 4
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

4.     AAEC is a wholly owned subsidiary of ABN AMRO specialising in holding equity
     stakes for ABN AMRO (for example following restructurings).
5.     Entero is a wholly owned subsidiary of ING specialising in risk bearing capital (for
     example by holding equity stakes following restructurings).
6.     BMC is a consultancy and management firm specialising in consultancy services for the
     Dutch public sector. It employs approximately 1,200 consultants who assist government at
     central, local and regional level, to improve the quality of public sector services in the
     Netherlands.
II. THE OPERATION
7.     The proposed concentration concerns the acquisition of a shareholding and veto rights by
     AAEC and Entero which relate to the whole of BMC. Given a restructuring required to
     decrease the level of debt of BMC, ABN AMRO and ING (lenders to BMC), agreed with
     BMC a debt to equity swap (by means of conversion of part of the loans to BMC into
     equity). As a result of this restructuring and according to a shareholders' agreement
     ("SHA") signed on 30 March 2012, AAEC and Entero will hold […]% and […]% of the
     ordinary shares in BMC respectively. The SHA also foresees that AAEC and Entero will
     each be provided with veto rights on the adoption of the budget, business plan and major
     investments at the general shareholders' meetings.
8.     Therefore, AAEC and Entero will acquire joint control over BMC and the notified
     transaction represents a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
     Regulation.
III. EU DIMENSION
9.     The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 000 million3 (ABN AMRO: EUR 7 794 million, ING: EUR […] million,
     BMC: EUR […] million). At least two of them have an EU-wide turnover in excess of
     EUR 250 million (ABN AMRO: EUR […] million, ING: EUR […] million, BMC: EUR
     […] million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide
     turnover within one and the same Member State.
10. Therefore, the transaction has a Union dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the Merger
     Regulation.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
     1. Market definition
11. According to the notifying parties, BMC is a consultancy and management firm
     specialising in providing consultancy services to the Dutch public sector.4 It provides
3    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
     Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p. 1).
4    The notifying parties note that over the past five years BMC has also assisted organisations in the Czech
     Republic, Germany, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Romania, Serbia, Croatia and Turkey.
     However, these activities represent less than [0-5]% of BMC's activities.
                                                            2

    advice to government or non-profit institutions such as local authorities, ministries,
    provinces, regional collaborations, care institutions, institutions for arts, culture and
    sports, educational institutions, judicial organisations, social security organisations,
    aliens and naturalisation offices and refugee centres, welfare organisations, housing
    corporations, water boards, other boards and agencies. BMC's consultancy services can
    broadly be divided into five categories: (i) advisory services, which include consultant
    advisory, benchmarking and research services; (ii) change management, which is advice
    on cultural and behavioural changes within client organisations; (iii) temporary interim
    management services; (iv) secondment and policy advice; and (iv) coaching to public-
    sector workers to improve performance and results. According to the notifying parties,
    BMC's activities do not in any way include consultations regarding the financing of its
    clients. BMC does not provide management consultancy services to the private sector.
12. The Commission has not examined the area of provision of consultancy services to
    public administrations yet. It nonetheless recognised in a previous decision that the
    markets for the provision of management consultancy services, in general, have both
    national and international aspects, but left open whether in particular the markets for
    retirement benefits consulting, pension administration, human capital consulting and
    investment consulting services are national or EEA-wide in scope.5
13. ABN AMRO and ING are large financial institutions and are both active in (i) retail
    banking, (ii) corporate banking, (iii) investment banking, (iv) financial market services,
    (v) factoring, (vi) asset management and (vii) insurance in the Netherlands and
    internationally. Both parents are also active in provision of credit to public authorities.6
14. As the concentration does not raise serious doubts under any alternative definition, the
    product and geographic delineation of the relevant markets can be left open for the
    purpose of this decision.
    2. Assessment
15. Neither of the notifying parties is active in the provision of consultancy and
    management services to the public sector (or upstream or downstream of such markets)
    in the Netherlands (or elsewhere), in which BMC is specialised.
16. For these reasons, the Commission concludes that the concentration will not lead to a
    significant impediment of competition in those markets.
17. Furthermore, spill-over effects in the meaning of Article 2(4) of the Merger Regulation
    as a result of the proposed transaction can be discarded.
18. None of the parents has activities in the same market(s) as the joint venture or in a
    market which is up- or downstream from that/those of the joint venture.
5   Case COMP/M.5597 - Towers Perrin/Watson Wyatt.
6 The Commission in the past found that financing of local authorities has to be considered distinct from
    corporate banking (see case M.873 – Bank Austria/Creditanstalt; case COMP/M. 2400 - Dexia/Artesia;
    case COMP/M.5861 – Republik Österreich/Hypo Group Alpe Adria), but left open the question of
    whether the overall market of credit to public authorities and the market for financing of infrastructure
    constitute in themselves other separate relevant markets (see case COMP/M.5508 - Soffin/Hypo Real
    Estate). The geographic dimension of financing of local authorities has been considered to be national
                                                         3

19. Indeed, the parent companies and BMC perform different types of activities. ING and
   ABN AMRO are large financial institutions and are both active in (i) retail banking, (ii)
   corporate banking, (iii) investment banking, (iv) financial market services, (v) factoring,
   (vi) asset management and (vii) insurance in the Netherlands and internationally, while
   BMS is a Dutch management consultancy firm specialised in providing management
   consultancy services to the Dutch public sector.
20. The only market where ABN AMRO and ING are active in and which could,
   hypothetically, be conceived as related to the activities of BMC is the market for credit
   to public authorities (including financing of local authorities). Although the notifying
   parties maintain that BMC's activities do not relate in any way to the financing of its
   clients, for the sake of completeness they have estimated that the combined market share
   of ABN AMRO and ING in the provision of credit to public authorities in the
   Netherlands is only [10-20]% with a negligible increment (ABN AMRO [10-20]%, ING
   [0-5]%).7 The activities of BMC in management consulting services to the public sector
   are also small. They are estimated at below [5-10]% in the Netherlands and negligible
   on any wider market.
21. Furthermore the joint venture only represents a small part of the parents' portfolio, so
   that coordination between independent undertakings that restricts competition within the
   meaning of Article 101(1) of the TFEU is highly unlikely.
V. CONCLUSION
22. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
   notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
   EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
   Regulation.
                                                               For the Commission
                                                               (signed)
                                                               Antonio TAJANI
                                                               Vice-President
7  It shall also be noted that any further market segmentation (e.g. infrastructure financing, financing of local
   authorities) would not materially impact the position of the parties, […]
                                                          4
