
                         EUROPEAN COMMISSION
  In the published version of this decision, some
                                                                 Brussels, 23.8.2012
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
                                                                 C(2012) 5993 final
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are                        PUBLIC VERSION
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.                                                  MERGER PROCEDURE
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:         Case No COMP/M.6638 - ABN AMRO/RABOBANK/LANDSBANKI/
                 HEIPLOEG
                 Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                 No 139/20041
1. On 18 July 2012, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
      concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which the undertakings
      ABN Amro Effecten Compagnie B.V ("AAEC", The Netherlands) belonging to ABN
      AMRO Bank N.V. ("ABN AMRO", The Netherlands), Rabo Investments B.V. ("Rabo
      Investments", The Netherlands) and Friesland Bank N.V. ("FB", The Netherlands)
      belonging to Coöperatieve Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank B.A ("Rabobank", The
      Netherlands) and Landsbanki Islands HF ("Landsbanki", Iceland) acquire within the
      meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint control of the undertaking
      Heiploeg Holding B.V and its group companies ("Heiploeg Group", The Netherlands)
      by way of purchase of shares.2 (AAEC, Rabo Investments, Friesland Bank and
      Landsbanki are hereinafter referred to as the "notifying parties").
I.      THE PARTIES
2. AAEC is a wholly owned subsidiary of ABN AMRO specialising in holding equity
      stakes for ABN AMRO (for example following restructurings). ABN AMRO is an
      international banking group active worldwide in four principal customer segments:
      personal banking, private banking, business and commercial clients and corporate and
      institutional clients.
1      OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
       the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the
       replacement of "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The terminology
       of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2      Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 218, 24.7.2012, p.13.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.
                                                            1

3. Rabo Investments and Friesland Bank are wholly owned subsidiaries of Rabobank, a
    large financial institution active in the Netherlands and internationally.
4. Landsbanki is an Icelandic general bank and credit institution mainly active in retail and
    corporate banking.
5. Heiploeg Group is active in the sourcing, processing, distribution and selling of shrimps.
II.   THE OPERATION
6. The proposed concentration concerns the acquisition of veto rights by AAEC, Rabo
    Investments, FB and Landsbanski over the strategic decisions of Heiploeg Group. […]
7. Under the terms of the Shareholders Agreement (the "SHA") signed on 21 June 2012,
    the veto rights granted to the Shareholders will only become exercisable once the Parties
    have received clearance decision from the Commission. The SHA also foresees that the
    Shareholders will acquire veto rights […], thus conferring negative joint control on the
    Shareholders over the Heiploeg Group.
8. In view of the above, the notified transaction represents a concentration within the
    meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
III. EU DIMENSION
9. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
    than EUR 5 000 million3 (ABN AMRO: EUR 7 794 million, Rabobank: EUR […]
    million, Landsbanki: EUR […] million, Heiploeg Group: EUR […] million). At least
    two of the undertakings concerned have an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250
    million (ABN AMRO: EUR […] million, Rabobank: EUR […] million, Landsbanki:
    EUR […] million, Heiploeg Group: EUR […] million). […]
10. Therefore, the notified operation has an EU dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the
    Merger Regulation.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
      1. Market definition
11. Heiploeg Group is active in the sourcing, processing, distribution and (wholesale)
    selling of shrimps. Its expertise lies in providing innovative and high quality (premium)
    shrimp products with a focus on freshness and quality. To this end, the Heiploeg Group
    operates its own production, cooling, packaging and logistics operations. Heiploeg
    Group has its own transport division, Heitrans B.V. which specializes in cooling and
    deepfreeze transport throughout Europe.
12. The Commission has not adopted a definite market definition with respect to the scope
    of the relevant product market(s) for shrimps yet. Nevertheless, in two previous
    decisions4, the Commission considered that the markets for the wholesale of tropical
    shrimps, North Sea shrimps, and North Atlantic shrimps could potentially be regarded as
    separate relevant product markets due to characteristics such as taste, size, colour, price and
3   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation.
4   Case COMP/M.4089 – Gilde/Heiploeg, 31 January 2006 and Case COMP/M.2078 – UBS
    Capital/Heiploeg Shellfish International, 21 August 2000.

    processing methods. However, in both decisions the Commission did not reach a definite
    conclusion on the exact definition of the relevant product market or its geographic scope.
    Furthermore, the Commission did not indicate whether a separate fishing and sale of
    shrimps and shellfish market should be considered.5
13. AAEC, Rabo Investments, FB and Landsbanki are active in (i) retail banking, (ii)
    corporate banking (including finance to local authorities), (iii) investment banking and
    (iv) financial market services.
14. As the concentration does not raise serious doubts under any alternative definition, the
    product and geographic delineation of the relevant markets can be left open for the
    purpose of this decision.
        2. Assessment
15. None of the notifying parties is active in the sourcing, processing, distribution and
    (wholesale) selling of shrimps markets or in a market which is upstream or downstream
    or in neighbouring markets closely related to this market in which Heiploeg Group
    operate.
16. For these reasons, the Commission concludes that the concentration will not lead to a
    significant impediment of competition in that market.
17. Furthermore, spill-over effects in the meaning of Article 2(4) of the Merger Regulation
    as a result of the proposed transaction can be excluded.
18. Indeed, the joint venture and the parent companies perform different types of activities.
    The notifying parties are active in the retail banking market, the corporate banking
    market, the investment banking market and the financial market services, while
    Heiploeg Group is active in the sourcing, processing, distribution and (wholesale)
    selling of shrimps markets.
19. Furthermore the joint venture only represents a small part of the parents' portfolio, so
    that coordination between independent undertakings that restricts competition within the
    meaning of Article 101(1) of the TFEU is highly unlikely.
V.    CONCLUSION
20. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
                                                                 For the Commission
                                                                 (signed)
                                                                 Algirdas ŠEMETA
                                                                 Member of the Commission
5   Case COMP/M.2078 – UBS Capital/Heiploeg Shellfish International, 21 August 2000.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.
                                                           3
