                             EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 19.12.2012
                                                                 C(2012)9900
   In the published version of this decision, some
   information has been omitted pursuant to Article                       PUBLIC VERSION
   17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
   concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
   other confidential information. The omissions are                   MERGER PROCEDURE
   shown thus […]. Where possible the information
   omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
   general description.
                                                                 To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.6738 – GOLDMAN SACHS/KKR/QMH
               Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
               No 139/20041
1. On 16 November 2012, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
     concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which the undertaking
     Goldman Sachs Group, Inc ("Goldman Sachs", USA) and KKR & Co. L.P. ("KKR",
     USA) acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint
     control of the undertaking QMH Limited ("QMH", United Kingdom) by way of
     purchase of shares2. (Goldman Sachs, KKR and QMH are designated hereinafter as the
     "notifying parties" or "parties to the proposed transaction".)
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
     operation falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
     doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
3. Goldman Sachs is a global investment banking, securities and investment management
     firm. Its activities are generally divided into four segments: (i) investment banking, (ii)
     institutional client services, (iii) investing and lending, and (iv) investment management.
1        OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
         the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the
         replacement of "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The
         terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2        Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 365, 24.11.2012, p.5.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

4. KKR is a global investment firm, which offers a broad range of alternative asset funds and
    other investment products to investors and provides capital markets solutions for the firm,
    its portfolio companies and other clients. KKR's affiliated private equity funds invest in
    companies in a variety of sectors. Each KKR-affiliated portfolio company has its own
    board of directors, which generally includes one or more KKR representatives, and is
    operated and financed independently from other KKR-affiliated portfolio companies.
5. QMH owns and operates 18 upscale and upper midscale chain hotels in the UK, 21 chain
    hotels in Germany and 19 chain hotels in the Netherlands.
II.   THE OPERATION
6. QMH is currently indebted pursuant to a Mezzanine Loan Agreement with [affiliates of
    Goldman Sachs and KKR] and [another fund] ([another fund A]; together the "Mezzanine
    Lenders"). The proposed concentration concerns the acquisition by Goldman Sachs and
    KKR of shares corresponding to [the majority] of the overall shares in QMH. The
    operation consists of a debt restructuring whereby the buyers accept equity in lieu of their
    credit with some of QMH's current shareholders.
7. Before the transaction, [the majority] of QMH's shares are owned by Goldman Sachs, and
    [the minority] are owned by [another fund B], a Luxembourg based fund, which will retain
    its interest after the Transaction.
8. In view of the limited value of QMH, all shareholders ([except another fund B]) have
    undertaken to sell their shares, corresponding to [the majority] of the QMH shares, to the
    Mezzanine Lenders (Goldman Sachs, KKR and [another fund A]). Following the
    transaction, [this majority] of shares will be allocated as follows: [a significant part] to
    Goldman Sachs, [a significant part] to KKR and [a minority part] to [another fund A]. The
    remaining [minority part] in QMH's capital will be held by the previous shareholder
    [another fund B].
9. Pursuant to an amended Shareholders Agreement, Goldman Sachs and KKR will each
    designate […] out of the […] members composing the board of directors (the other […]
    members will be designated by [another fund A] and [another fund B]). Board decisions
    will require a majority of directors, and the presence of both Goldman Sachs' and KKR's
    directors will be necessary to constitute a quorum, so that both Goldman Sachs and KKR
    will have a veto power over all board decisions. Neither [another fund A] nor [another fund
    B] will exercise any decisive influence over QMH.
III. CONCENTRATION
10. In light of the above, the proposed transaction thus concerns the acquisition by Goldman
    Sachs and KKR of joint control over QMH and constitutes a concentration within the
    meaning of Article 3(l)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. EU DIMENSION
11. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more than
    EUR 5 000 million (Goldman Sachs: EUR 29 540 million; KKR: EUR […] million; QMH:
    EUR […] million). Each of them has a EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million
    (Goldman Sachs: EUR […] million; KKR: EUR […] million; QMH: EUR […] million),
    but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within
    one and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension.
                                                   2

V. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
      1. Market definition
12. The Parties' activities overlap in the hotel sector (between Goldman Sachs and QMH),
    as well as in a number of other financial activities sectors (between Goldman Sachs and
    KKR). QMH is active in the hotel accommodation sector. It operates 18 hotels in the
    United Kingdom, 20 hotels in Germany and 19 hotels in the Netherlands.
13. Goldman Sachs and KKR are internationally active in the areas of corporate finance,
    and the private equity segment of the corporate finance market or asset management
    services (even though they typically invest in different assets).
     (i) Hotel accommodation
14. In its previous decisions concerning the hotel accommodation sector, the Commission
    has left open the exact product market definition. Previously, the Commission
    considered that the market could be segmented (i) by price / comfort level based on the
    grading or stars awarded to a particular hotel which indicates the standard and facilities
    the customer may expect, and (ii) by ownership, distinguishing between chain hotels and
    independent hotels3.
15. The Parties have submitted that there is an "all hotels" product market, comprising chain
    and independent hotels providing comparable standard and facilities. According to the
    Parties, hotels can be classified, according to industry standards, as falling into three
    broad categories: (i) luxury and upper upscale; (ii) upscale and upper midscale; (iii)
    midscale and economy4.
16. As far as the geographic scope of the market is concerned, in previous decisions,
    although the Commission has left the exact market definition of the hotel sector open, it
    has noted that the relevant geographic market may be both national and local5. The
    notifying parties agree with this view.
17. As the concentration does not raise serious doubts under any alternative definition, the
    product and geographic delineation of the relevant markets can be left open for the
    purpose of this decision.
18. As far as vertically related markets are concerned, the Commission has previously
    considered that important inputs for hotels are food and drinks wholesaling and linen
    rental and laundry services6, while downstream activities include booking agents, third
    party booking websites or tour operators/travel agencies from which hotels derive
3   See cases n0 COMP/M.6058 - Bank of Scotland/Barclays Bank/Kew Green Hotels, §13; COMP/M.4816 -
    Blackstone/Hilton, §10; COMP/M.4624 - EQT/Scandic, §8; COMP/M.3858 – Lehman
    Brothers/SCG/Starwood/Le Méridien, §16.
4   According to the Parties, these three categories could be further expanded, as per industry standards, into
    six segments (for both independent and chain hotels): (i) luxury; (ii) upper-upscale; (iii) upscale; (iv)
    uppermidscale; (v) midscale; and (vi) economy. Categories (iii) and (iv) would correspond to a 3-4 star
    hotel rating; categories (ii) to (iv) would cover 4-star hotels, whereas categories (iii) to (vi) would cover 2-
    4 star hotels.
5   See cases No. COMP/M.6058 - Bank of Scotland.Barclays Bank/Kew Green Hotels, §15; COMP/M.4816
    - Blackstone/Hilton, §15; COMP/M.3858 - Lehman Brothers/SCG/Starwood/Le Meridien §§18 and 19;
    Case     IV/M.     1596       -    Accor/Blackstone/Colony/Vivendi,       §29;    and       COMP/M.2197 -
    Hilton/Accor/Forte/Travel Services JV. §28.
6   See case n° COMP/M.6058 - Bank of Scotland/Barclays Bank/Kew Green Hotels, §§37-38.
                                                             3

    revenues. For the purposes of the present case, however, the exact market definition of
    upstream and downstream markets can be left open given the absence of any overlaps.
    (ii) Other markets related to the activities of the parents
19. Goldman Sachs and KKR are both active internationally in the areas of corporate
    finance, and the private equity segment of the corporate finance market or asset
    management services (even though they typically invest in different assets). In the case
    at hand, it is however not necessary to conclude on the relevant product and geographic
    market definitions on any of those markets since, absent any significant overlaps
    between Goldman Sachs and KKR, no competition concerns arise irrespective of the
    market definition.
      2. Assessment
20. None of the KKR-controlled portfolio companies are active in the hotel sector or in any
    downstream or upstream sector in the EEA. Goldman Sachs and QMH's activities in the
    hotel sector overlap on the United Kingdom, German and Dutch markets. QMH does not
    own or operate any independent hotels. However, there are no overlaps between the
    activities of Goldman Sachs and QMH in the same potential product and geographical
    market resulting in a combined market share of 15% or more7.
21. Furthermore, the transaction does not lead to any affected upstream or downstream
    market, as neither Goldman Sachs nor KKR are active in any market vertically related to
    QMH's activities.
22. For these reasons, the Commission concludes that the concentration will not lead to
    serious doubts as to the compatibility with the internal market in those markets.
23. Furthermore, spill-over effects in the meaning of Article 2(4) of the Merger Regulation
    as a result of the proposed transaction can be discarded.
24. Neither Goldman Sachs nor KKR have activities in a market which is up- or
    downstream from that of QMH or in neighbouring markets closely related to this
    market.
25. Indeed, the joint venture and the parent companies perform different types of activities.
    Goldman Sachs and KKR are both active in the areas of (i) corporate finance, (ii) the
    private equity segment of the corporate finance market and (iii) asset management,
    whereas QMH is active only in the hotels accommodation sector.
26. Furthermore the joint venture only represents a small part of the parents´ portfolio and is
    the result of a debt restructuring operation (and not a strategic investment), so that
    coordination between independent undertakings that restricts competition within the
    meaning of Article 101(1) of the TFEU is highly unlikely.
7   On a national level, the Parties combined market shares are below 4% in the United Kingdom, Germany
    and the Netherlands. On a local level, the Parties' combined market shares are below 15% on all possible
    segments (all hotels, all chain hotels, 3-4 star hotels, 4 star hotels (when applicable) or 2-4 star hotels) in
    Amsterdam, Gatwick, Glasgow, Nottingham and Stratford-upon-Avon.
                                                             4

CONCLUSION
27. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
                                                  For the Commission,
                                                  signed,
                                                  Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                  Vice-President
                                              5
