                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                  Brussels, 3.12.2012
    In the published version of this decision, some               C(2012)9204
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                       PUBLIC VERSION
    other confidential information. The omissions are
    shown thus […]. Where possible the information                       MERGER PROCEDURE
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
    general description.
            To the notifying party:
   Dear Sir/Madam,
   Subject:       Case No COMP/M.6752 - CVC/ CUNNINGHAM LINDSEY
                  Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                  No 139/20041
   1. On 6 November 2012, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
       concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which CVC Capital
       Partners SICAV-FIS S.A. and its subsidiaries and affiliates ("CVC", Luxembourg)
       acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation sole control of
       Cunningham Lindsay Group Limited ("Cunningham Lindsey", United States) by way of
       purchase of shares.
I.          THE PARTIES
   2. CVC (hereinafter "CVC" or the "Notifying party") consists of CVC Capital Partners
       SICAV-FIS S.A. and its subsidiaries and affiliates. These are privately owned advisory
     1      OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
            the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the
            replacement of "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The
            terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
   Commission européenne, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE / Europese Commissie, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË. Tel.: +32 229-91111.

       entities whose activities include providing investment advice to and/or managing
       investments on behalf of CVC Funds. CVC Funds hold controlling interests in a number of
       companies in various industries including chemicals, utilities, manufacturing, retailing and
       distribution, primarily in Europe, the US and the Asia-Pacific region. Two of CVC Funds'
       Portfolio Companies, AA/Saga and Brit Insurance, are engaged in insurance activities.
       AA/Saga offers insurance underwriting services and financial services products (e.g.
       savings accounts, personal loans, and credit card services) in the United Kingdom (UK)
       and Ireland. Brit Insurance is predominantly active in the UK and Ireland underwriting
       commercial insurance and non-life reinsurance. As such, both are customers of loss
       adjusting, claims management and loss consultancy services.
    3. Cunningham Lindsey is a global provider of insurance loss adjusting, claims
       management, loss consultancy and property reinstatement services in 61 countries,
       including the UK and Ireland.
    4. CVC and Cunningham Linsey are together referred to as "the Parties".
II.        THE OPERATION AND THE CONCENTRATION
    5. Pursuant to an Agreement and plan of merger dated 28 September 2012, CVC shall acquire
       from the current owners2 a shareholding of approximately […]% in CL Holdings, which is
       an entity established for the purposes of the proposed transaction. The remaining […]%
       shall be held respectively by Fairfax ([…]%), Stone Point ([…]%), Cunningham Lindsey's
       Management ([…]%) and Allied World Assurance Company Limited ([…]%). CL
       Holdings will hold 100% of the voting rights of Cunningham Lindsey and each of its
       subsidiaries.
    6. The Board of Directors of CL Holdings shall have broad authority to manage the business
       and affairs of CL Holdings, including taking actions which determine its strategic
       commercial behaviour. According to the Shareholders' Agreement, CVC shall have the
       right to designate five of the nine directors on the Board of Directors of CL Holdings.
       Decisions of the Board are taken by majority. A limited number of matters shall be
       authorised at shareholder level. These matters are minority shareholder protection rights,
       such as amendments to the organisational documents, liquidation and reorganisation of
       share capital.
    7. On the basis of the above it can be concluded that CVC acquires sole control over
       Cunningham Lindsey. The notified transaction therefore constitutes a concentration within
       the      meaning         of     Article       3(1)(b)     of     the      Merger        Regulation.
     2     Currently, Cunningham Lindsey is jointly owned by the following: Stone Point (through three of the
           funds managed, i.e. Trident Professionals CL Holdings, LLC and Trident CL Holdings, Wentworth
           Insurance Company Ltd.) with […]% of the shares, an affiliate of Fairfax Financial Holdings
           Limited ("Fairfax") holding […]%, Management of Cunningham Lindsey holding […]% and Brera
           GAB International Holdings LLC […]%.
                                                       2

III.        EU DIMENSION
    8. The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more than
        EUR 5 000 million3 (CVC: EUR […] million; Cunningham Lindsey: EUR […] million).
        Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (CVC: EUR […]
        million; Cunningham Lindsey: EUR […] million), but they do not achieve more than two-
        thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The
        notified operation therefore has an EU dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of Merger
        Regulation.
IV.         ASSESSMENT
    IV.1. RELEVANT MARKETS
            IV.1.1. PRODUCT MARKET DEFINITION
            IV.1.1.1. Upstream market: claim-related services
    9. Cunningham Lindsey is active in four insurance claim related markets, namely the
        provision of loss adjustment services, claims management services, loss consultancy
        services and property reinstatement services.
            IV. 1.1.1.1 Loss adjustment services
    10. The Commission has not previously considered a market definition for loss adjustment
        services. According to the Notifying party, loss adjustment is a service related to the
        provision of insurance services. It involves attending the insured and inspecting the
        scene of loss in order to address the fundamental questions of whether the insurer has a
        liability to pay the insured under the terms of the insurance contract, e.g. how much it
        will cost the insurer and whether the insurer is able to recover its payment from another
        party.
    11. Most loss adjustment services are handled in-house by insurers or by insurance brokers
        with a small proportion handled by outsourced service provider. The customers of this
        service are primarily insurance companies and self-insured corporations.
    12. The Notifying party submits that this market is a different product market from all the
        other services that Cunningham Lindsey provides.
    13. The market investigation in this case indicated that from both supply and demand-side
        substitutability perspective loss adjustment services belong to a separate product market.
        This is mainly because, according to market participants, these services are provided
        separately from the other types of claim-related services.
    3       Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation.
                                                         3

14. In any event, the precise product market definition for loss adjustment services can be
    left open in this case, since the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market regardless of the exact product market definition.
        IV. 1.1.1.2. Claims management services
15. The Commission has not previously considered an appropriate market definition for
    claims management services. According to the Notifying party claims management
    services cover the end-to-end management of the property and/or casualty insurance
    claims process. The services are typically provided for a portfolio of claims and may
    cover all activities from first notification of loss, through all aspects of claims
    processing and administration to claim settlement and payment. The customers of this
    service are primarily insurance companies and self-insured corporations.
16. The majority of claims management is handled in-house by insurers or by brokers in the
    insurance sector with only a small proportion outsourced to service providers such as
    Cunningham Lindsey.
17. The Notifying party submits that this market is a different product market from all the
    other services that Cunningham Lindsey provides.
18. The market investigation strongly indicated that from both a supply and demand-side
    substitutability perspective claim management services belong to a different product
    market from the other services provided by Cunningham Lindsey. This is mainly because,
    according to market participants, these services are provided separately from the other
    types of claim-related services.
19. In any event, the precise product market definition for claims management services can
    be left open in this case, since the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market regardless of the exact market definition.
        IV. 1.1.1.3. Loss consultancy services
20. With regard to the relevant product market, the Commission has not previously
    considered an appropriate market definition for loss consultancy services. According to
    the Notifying party, loss consultancy services include both pre-loss and post-loss
    consultancy and covers cause and origin investigation, fraud investigation, cost
    estimates, value appraisals, risk surveys, project management and training.
21. Activities in this area are derived primarily from: (i) referrals from loss adjusting
    businesses when specific expertise is required in managing a claim (e.g. building
    consultancy services to prepare scopes of work and estimates for repairing buildings;
    forensic engineers to identify engineering failures; investigators to identify the origin
    and cause of fires); (ii) referrals from other loss adjusters; (iii) service agreements with
    insurers used in association with their own internal assessment or claims process; and
    (iv) owners or managers of property portfolios (e.g. corporations and governments).
22. The Notifying party submits that this market is a different product market from all the
    other services that Cunningham Lindsey provides.
                                                4

23. The market investigation strongly indicated that from both a supply and demand-side
    substitutability perspective loss consultancy services belong to a different product market
    from the other services provided by Cunningham Lindsey. This is mainly because,
    according to market participants, these services are provided separately from the other
    types of claim-related services.
24. In any event, the precise product market definition for loss consultancy services can be
    left open in this case, since the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market regardless of the exact market definition.
        IV. 1.1.1.4. Property reinstatement services
25. With regard to the relevant product market, the Commission has not previously
    considered an appropriate market definition for loss adjustment services. Post-loss
    property reinstatement services are services associated with an insurance claim where
    the insurance carrier is involved in the repair or replacement of lost or damaged property
    following an insurance claim.
26. The Notifying party submits that this market is a different product market from all the
    other services that Cunningham Lindsey provides.
27. The market investigation strongly indicated that from both a supply and demand-side
    substitutability perspective property reinstatement services belong to a different product
    market from the other services provided by Cunningham Lindsey. This is mainly because,
    according to market participants, these services are provided separately from the other
    types of claim-related services.
28. In any event, the precise product market definition for property reinstatement services
    can be left open in this case, since the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market regardless of the exact market definition.
        IV.1.1.2. Downstream market: insurance sale-related services
29. AA/Saga and Brit Insurance, two CVC's subsidiaries are active in the markets for
    insurance underwriting and distribution and respectively, insurance underwriting and
    reinsurance.
        IV. 1.1.2.1. Insurance underwriting
30. In a previous case4 the Commission has found that i) the underwriting of
    insurance/reinsurance risks and ii) the management of policies on behalf of insurers/re-
    insurers constituted one single product market (distinct from the provision of
    insurance/reinsurance itself). The Commission has also considered whether this market
    should be further sub-divided on the basis of the risks for which the services are covered.
    Ultimately, the Commission left open the question of whether the market for the
    underwriting and management services to insurers and re-insurers should be further sub-
    divided.
4       Commission Decision in Case COMP/M.3035, Berkshire Hathaway/ Converium/ Gaum/ JV, OJ C 65,
        19.03.2003, p.22.
                                                5

31. In any event, the precise product market definition for insurance underwriting services
    can be left open in this case, since the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market regardless of the exact market definition.
         IV. 1.1.2.2. Insurance distribution
32. The market for insurance distribution involves procuring insurance cover for individual
    and corporate customers through different channels, comprising direct writers, tied agents
    and intermediaries such as banks and brokers5.
33. In previous decisions6 the Commission has considered whether the market for insurance
    distribution comprises exclusively all outward (i.e. non-owned and third-party) insurance
    distribution channels (e.g. brokers and agents), or if the sales forces and office network
    of insurance companies (constituting a direct means of sale to end-customers) also fall
    within the market of insurance distribution. Nonetheless, the definition has always been
    left open.
34. In any event, the precise product market definition for insurance distribution services can
    be left open in this case, since the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market regardless of the exact market definition.
         IV. 1.1.2.3. Reinsurance
35. Reinsurance consists in providing insurance cover to another party (the insurer) for part or
    all of the liability assumed by the latter party under a policy or policies of insurance which
    it has issued. It is a means of risk management, to transfer risk from the insurer to the
    reinsurer.
36. The Commission has in the past distinguished the market for reinsurance from those for life
    insurance and non-life insurance, but left open whether, within the reinsurance market, a
    further distinction between life and non-life segments should be considered, and whether
    within the non-life segment, segmentation according to the class of risk covered should be
    considered7.
37. In any event, the precise product market definition for reinsurance services can be left
    open in this case, since the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
    compatibility with the internal market regardless of the exact market definition.
         IV.1.2. GEOGRAPHIC MARKET DEFINITION
    IV.1.2.1. Geographic market for claim-related services
38. The Notifying party submits that the geographic market for all the above claims-related
    services, i.e. loss adjustment, claims management, loss consultancy and property
5        Commission Decision in Case COMP/M.1307, Marsh & McLennan/Sedgwick, para. 8 et seq, OJ
         C 372, 02.12.1998, p. 10.
6        Commission Decision in Case COMP/M.4284, AXA/Winterthur, OJ C239, 04.10.2006, p.19.
7        See Commission Decisions in Cases COMP/M.5925, MetLife/Alico/Delam, OJ C 256, 23.09.2010,
         p.2, COMP/M.5083, Groupama/OTP Garancia, OJ C 140, 06.06.2008, p.5.
                                                  6

    reinstatement should be considered as national. This is because (i) for the provision for
    each of the services there is a need to maintain nationally located employees who can
    liaise locally with the clients and undertake site visits to the extent necessary; (ii) the
    ability to speak local language and local knowledge are required; (iii) business
    organisation and management of the companies are nationally based.
39. The market investigation in this case indicated that the market for all these services could
    be national or possibly limited to the Ireland/UK cluster. The market investigation results
    showed that some providers are also active outside Ireland, mostly in the UK. Most of the
    providers are seated in Ireland or have a local office. In addition, as regards the internal
    organisation of these providers, most of them are organised on national basis.
40. In any event, the precise geographic market definition can be left open for the purpose of
    the present case, as the transaction is unlikely to raise competition concerns irrespective
    of the precise geographic market definition.
    IV.1.2.2. Geographic market for insurance sale-related services
41. As regards the insurance underwriting, the Commission has considered in the past that
    the market is at least EEA wide, although it left the exact geographic market definition
    open8.
42. For the purpose of this case the Commission can leave the exact geographic market
    definitions open as the transaction is unlikely to raise competition concerns irrespective
    of the precise geographic market definition.
43. As far as the insurance distribution is concerned, the Commission, in previous decisions,
    while recognising the national nature of insurance distribution channels, left open the
    precise market definition, in particular the question whether the relevant geographic market
    is wider than national9.
44. The exact geographic market definition can also be left open in the present case, as the
    transaction is unlikely to raise any competition concerns irrespective of the precise market
    definition.
45. As regards the reinsurance, the Commission has previously defined the geographic
    market as global, due to the need to pool risks on a worldwide basis10.
46. In any event, the precise geographic market definition can be left open for the purpose of
    the present case, as the transaction is unlikely to raise competition concerns irrespective
    of the precise geographic market definition.
8        Commission Decision in Case COMP/M.3035 Berkshire Hathaway/Converium/ Gaum/JV, OJ C 65,
         19.03.2003, p.22.
9        Commission Decisions in Cases COMP/M.1307 Marsh & McLennan/Sedgwick, OJ C 372,
         02.12.1998, p.10, COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur, OJ C 239, 04.10.2006, p.19.
10       Commission Decisions in Cases COMP/M.5925 MetLife/Alico/Delam; OJ C 256, 23.09.2010, p.2,
         COMP/M.5083 Groupama/OTP Garancia, OJ C 140, 06.06.2008, p.5, COMP/M.4059, Swiss Re/GE
         Insurance Solutions, OJ C 127, 31.05.2006, p.21.
                                                      7

   IV.2. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
   47. The proposed transaction does not give rise to a horizontal overlap as the Parties are active
       on a different level of insurance related services.
   48. However, the Parties' activities overlap vertically. This is because the claim related services
       provided by Cunningham Linsey are upstream from the insurance related services provided
       by CVC's subsidiaries, AA/Saga and Brit Insurance. While this vertical overlap arises in a
       number of EU Member States (Belgium, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, The
       Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and the UK) the proposed transaction gives rise only to one
       vertically affected market for the provision of outsourced loss adjustment services in
       Ireland where Cunningham Lindsey holds a market share of [30-40]%11. In all other
       relevant markets, the Parties' market shares are either negligible or do not exceed 25%
       under any plausible market definition.
   49. The market investigation in this case revealed that Cunningham Lindsey may be positioned
       slightly differently in the market for loss adjustment services in Ireland, likely as the
       second or third player. Indeed, according to the market participants Thorton&Partners and
       Outsource Services Group are leaders in this market while Cunningham Linsey is only
       number three. Moreover, the market investigation indicated that the market for the
       provision of loss adjustment services in Ireland is competitive, characterized by a number
       of viable competitors including Thorton&Partners, Outsource Services Group and Pro
       Adjust, and that there are no entry barriers, except for the need for a local presence.
   50. As regards the downstream market, the market investigation in this case confirmed that
       both AA/Saga and Brit Insurance are minor players in the market for insurance
       underwriting and insurance distribution in Ireland, with market shares well below [10-
       20]%.
   51. On the basis of the above, it can be concluded that given the limited market shares of the
       Parties and the existence of numerous competitors who will continue to exercise
       competitive pressure on the merged entity in all relevant markets, the proposed transaction
       is unlikely to lead to any vertical effects.
V.         CONCLUSION
   52. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
       operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
       Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
       Regulation.
                                                            For the Commission
                                                            (signed)
                                                            Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                            Vice-President
   11      Notifying party's estimate, Form CO.
                                                     8
