                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 5.02.1996
                                                              PUBLIC VERSION
                                                               MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                               ARTICLE 6(1)(a)DECISION
                                                            To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.681 - RB of Scotland/Bank of Ireland
             Notification of 3.1.1996 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 03.01.1996, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration by
       which the Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc ("RBSG") and the Bank of Ireland ("BOI")
       will merge their American banking activities.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation does not have a Community dimension and therefore does not fall within the
       scope of the Merger Regulation.
I.     THE PARTIES
3.     RBSG is a holding company whose only direct operating subsidiary is the Royal Bank
       of Scotland plc ("RBS"). RBS is a commercial bank based in Scotland but operating
       throughout the United Kingdom. RBS and its subsidiaries are engaged principally in
       providing a comprehensive range of banking, insurance and other financial services.
4.     Citizens Financial Group ("Citizens") is a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned
       subsidiary of RBSG. It is active in consumer banking and lending to small and medium
       sized enterprises in the New England area of the U.S.A.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                              -2-
5.   BOI is a holding company. It is a credit institution. BOI and its subsidiaries are engaged
     in providing a comprehensive range of banking services through its four divisions; Retail;
     Corporate and Treasury; Bank of Ireland First Holdings; and Other Group Activities.
     BOI operates primarily in Ireland.
6.   Bank of Ireland First Holdings, Inc. ("BOIFH") is a New Hampshire corporation and
     wholly-owned subsidiary of BOI. It is active in consumer banking and lending enterprises
     in the New England area of the U.S.A.
II.  THE OPERATION
7.   The proposed transaction will involve the merger of BOIFH and Citizens. BOI will sell
     the entire common stock of BOIFH to Citizens, and BOIFH will be merged into Citizens.
     In exchange, BOI will receive stock representing 23.5% of the enlarged Citizens, whilst
     RBSG will retain the remaining 76.5% of the stock.
III. CONCENTRATION
8.   The transaction constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the
     Merger Regulation in view of the change of control of BOIFH.
IV. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
9.   RBSG and BOI have jointly agreed a [...](1) business plan for the enlarged Citizens. This
     business plan sets out the proposed development of Citizens for the period [...](2). It is
     summarised in a Strategic Plan.[...] (3)
10. As far as the market behaviour of the enlarged Citizens is concerned the most important
     elements in the Strategic Plan relate to [...](4)
11. The Strategic Plan does not make explicit prevision for the co-determination by RBSG
     and BOI of detailed annual business plans and budgets. Rather, the Strategic Plan
     contains merely general declarations concerning the business aims of the enlarged
     Citizens, and as such is not sufficient to confer joint control.
12. The stockholder agreement stipulates that each year Citizens shall prepare a detailed
     annual budget and business plan. Both RBSG and BOI will have the right to comment
     on the annual plan, but it is the board of directors of Citizens that has the right to
     approve the plan.
13. The enlarged Citizens may have up to fifteen directors. BOI will be entitled to appoint
     two, whilst RBSG will be entitled to appoint three of these directors. The remaining
     directors will represent various community interests in the locality in which Citizens will
     operate. Thus RBSG directors will outnumber BOI directors on the board, which latter,
(1)
     Deleted:  business  secret
(2)
     Deleted:  business  secret
(3)
     Deleted:  business  secret
(4)
     Deleted:  business  secret

                                             -3-
    as stated above, approves detailed annual plans. Hence BOI directors will not have a veto
    right over annual plans.
14. In view of the above, the stock-holder agreement does not confer joint control over the
    enlarged Citizens. BOI is selling the common stock of BOIFH to Citizens, and will
    receive a minority shareholding in the latter. In view of Article 5(2) of the merger
    regulation, only the turnover relating to the subject of the transaction is to be taken into
    account with regard to the seller. Hence the turnover to be taken into account for the
    purposes of determining whether the notified transaction has a community dimension is
    that of BOIFH, Citizens and RBSG. Only RBSG has a community wide turnover of more
    than 250 million ECU.
15. Therefore, the conditions of Article 1.2(b) of the Merger Regulation are not satisfied, and
    the notified transaction does not have a Community dimension.N° 4064/89.
V.  CONCLUSION
16. Based on the above, the Commission has concluded that the notified operation does not
    have a Community dimension within the meaning of Article 1 of the Merger Regulation
    and therefore does not fall within the scope of the Merger Regulation. This decision is
    adopted in application of Article 6(1)(a) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                       For the Commission,
