                               EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                Brussels, 29/4/2013
In the published version of this decision, some                 C(2013) 2597
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                         PUBLIC VERSION
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                    MERGER PROCEDURE
general description.                                               ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                To the notifying parties
 Dear Sir/Madam,
 Subject:      Case No COMP/M.6848 – AEGON / SANTANDER / SANTANDER VIDA
               / SANTANDER GENERALES
               Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
               No 139/20041
 (1)     On 27 March 2013, the European Commission received a notification of a proposed
         concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 ("the
         Merger Regulation") by which the undertaking Aegon Spain Holding B.V. ("Aegon
         Spain"), ultimately controlled by Aegon N.V. (the "Aegon", the Netherlands) and
         Santander Seguros y Reaseguros, Compania Aseguradora, S.A. ("Santander
         Seguros", Spain), ultimately controlled by Banco Santander SA ("Banco Santander",
         Spain), jointly referred to as "the Notifying Parties", acquire within the meaning of
         Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint control over Santander Vida and
         Santander Generales by way of purchase of shares (the "proposed transaction")2.
 (2)      The Notifying Parties together with Santander Vida and Santander Generales are
         referred as " the Parties".
 1        OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1. With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on the Functioning of the
         European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the replacement of "Community"
         by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The terminology of the TFEU will be used
         throughout this decision.
 2   Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 102, 09.04.2013, p.4.
 Commission européenne, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE / Europese Commissie, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË. Tel.: +32 229-91111.

1.    THE PARTIES
(3)     Aegon Spain is active in the life insurance and non-life insurance (including accident
        and health insurance) sectors in Spain. Aegon Spain belongs to Aegon Group of
        insurance companies headed by the parent company, Aegon N.V. Aegon Group's
        activities include asset management, insurance, pension and related products. Aegon
        Group is active worldwide, mainly in the United States, the Netherlands and the
        United Kingdom. Aegon Spain also participates in certain banc-assurance joint
        venture agreements with other Spanish savings banks.3
(4)     Santander Seguros is active in the life and non-life insurance markets and insurance
        distribution in Spain. It belongs to Santander Group, which is ultimately controlled
        by Banco Santander, active in commercial banking, retail banking, corporate
        banking, investment banking, asset management and treasury in Spain, the United
        Kingdom, some other European countries as well as in North and South America.
(5)     Santander Vida and Santander Generales (jointly referred to as the "JVs") will be
        active in the Spanish life and non-life insurance markets respectively.
2.    THE OPERATION
(6)     On […], the Notifying Parties signed a Sale and Purchase Agreement ("SPA")
        whereby Aegon Spain acquired 51% of the share capital of the JVs. The JVs were
        previously solely controlled by Santander Seguros. The Notifying Parties also signed
        an Alliance and Shareholders' agreement ("SHA"), to regulate their relationship as
        shareholders of the JVs.
(7)     In parallel, the Notifying Parties signed a number of agreements relevant for the
        operation of the JVs, namely:
        (a)     an Insurance Distribution Agency Agreement ("Agency Agreement") signed
                on the same day between the JVs and Santander Mediación Operador de
                Banca Seguros Vinculado, S.A. ("Santander Mediación") concerning the
                distribution of life and non-life insurance products of Santander Vida and
                Santander Generales through the commercial networks of Banco Santander,
                Banco Español de Crédito, S.A. ("Banesto"), Openbank, S.A. (Openbank")
                and Banco Banif, S.A. ("Banif"); and
        (b)      "Portofolio Assignment Agreements" whereby Santander Seguros assigned
                to Santander Vida and Santander Generales part of their insurance business.
3.    THE CONCENTRATION
        3.1      Joint control
(8)     The Notifying Parties submit that they will have joint control over the JVs. SHA
        provides that the decisions at the JVs' Shareholders' Meetings will require the
        favourable vote of absolute majority of the represented share capital.
3   See for example Cases M.6594 - "Aegon / Liberbank / Liberbank Vida", M.6223 – "Aegon / Banca Civica
    / Cajaburgos Vida", M.6110 – "Aegon / Unnim / Caixasabadell Vida".
                                                      2

(9)  The JVs' Boards of Directors will each have eight Directors; Aegon Spain and
     Santander Seguros will each appoint half of the Board's members. The chairman of the
     Board of Directors will be appointed by Aegon and will have a casting vote; the
     decisions of the Board will require absolute majority of the directors present or
     represented.
(10) The adoption of strategic decisions will require, depending on the type of the decision,
     a majority of two thirds of either the voting share capital or the Board of Directors.
     Indeed:
          i. a minimum majority of two thirds of the voting share capital will be necessary
              to approve resolutions concerning certain important corporate matters reserved
              for the Shareholders' Meeting, such as the business plan, the strategic plan, the
              annual budget, credit facilities, important contracts, as well as certain
              investments; and
          ii. the favourable vote of at least two thirds of the directors that make up the Board
              of Directors (the Chairman not having a casting vote) is required for the
              approval of strategic decisions such as the business plan, the strategic plan, the
              annual budget, credit facilities, important contracts, as well as certain
              investments.
(11) As a result, the Notifying Parties will have the ability to determine the strategic
     commercial behaviour of the JVs and to jointly exercise decisive influence over
     them. It follows that the Notifying Parties will jointly control the JVs.
     3.2      Full Functionality
(12) In order to constitute a concentration within the meaning of Article 3 (4) the Merger
     Regulation, a joint venture must perform on a lasting basis all the functions of an
     autonomous economic entity.
(13) In the present case, the parent companies will assign all necessary assets and
     contracts to the JVs so that they carry out the business in an autonomous manner.
     Specifically, the JVs' day-to-day operations will be conducted by their own General
     Managers and the JVs will hire their own employees which will develop their
     respective business according to the business plans set out by the JVs. The JVs will
     also comply, in their own name, with all the solvency requirements imposed by the
     2004 Spanish Insurance Act.
(14) The JVs, through the Agency Agreement signed with Santander Mediacion, will rely
     on the banking distribution network of Santander Group. Alternatively, non-bank
     distribution channels for the JVs' products are in principle available, but, distribution
     through a bank network remains in this case crucial for the success of the
     bancassurance business. Santander Mediacion will act as an agent for the JVs and
     will be remunerated for the distribution of the JVs' products in the form of a
     commission, on market conditions.
(15) It is not foreseen that the JVs will sell any products to the parent companies and the
     services the parent companies will provide Santander Vida and Santander Generales
     will be remunerated on an arm's length basis.
                                                  3

(16)     In light of the above, it can therefore be concluded that the proposed transaction
         constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
         Regulation.
4.    EU DIMENSION
(17)     The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
         than EUR 5 000 million4 in 2012 (EUR 19 526 million for Aegon Group, EUR 82 296
         million for Santander Group). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR
         250 million (EUR […] million for Aegon Group, EUR […] million for Santander
         Group). In addition, the notifying parties do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
         EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
(18)     The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension within the meaning of Article 1
         (2) of the Merger Regulation.
5.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
(19)     The Parties' activities overlap mainly horizontally on several market segments of life
         and non-life insurance. However, the proposed transaction gives rise to only two
         horizontally affected market segments in relation to the life insurance market: (i)
         investment products market in Spain, and (ii) life insurance for individuals in Spain.5
         5.1      Product Market Definition
(20)     In previous decisions relating to the insurance sector, the Commission has
         distinguished between three large categories of insurance product markets: life
         insurance, non-life insurance and reinsurance.6
                  5.1.1    Life insurance
(21)     As regards the life insurance market, the Commission has considered in the past the
         following subsegmentations, namely (i) pure protection products, (ii) pension
         products and (iii) investments products. The Commission has further considered the
         distinction based on category of customers between life insurance products
         addressed to individuals and to groups.7
(22)     The Notifying Parties submit that the life insurance market could be analysed as a
         single product market.
4   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p.1).
5    The term "affected market" is used here, in line with the Commission Notice on a simplified procedure
    for treatement of certain concentrations under the Council Regulation (EC) 139/2004, to indicate markets
    on which the Notifying Parties' combined market share in 2012 is i) in the same product and geographical
    market (horizontal relationships) 15% or more or ii) in product markets which are upstream or
    downstream from one another (vertical relationships) 25% or more. See point 5(1)(c) of the
    aforementioned notice.
6   Case No. COMP/M.4284 – AXA / Winterthur, Case No COMP/M.6053 – CVC / Apollo / Brit Insurance;
    COMP/M.6217 - Baloise Holding / Nateus / Nateus Life.
7   Case No. COMP/M.6521 - Talanx International / Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance / Warta; Case
    No.COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group / EBV; and Case No. COMP/M.4701 Generali / PPF
    Insurance business.
                                                         4

(23)    In any event, the exact product market definition in relation to life insurance can be
        left open in this case, as the proposed transaction does not raise competition
        concerns irrespective of the precise product market definition.
                 5.1.2   Non-life insurance
(24)    Regarding non-life insurance products, the Commission has in the past generally
        considered a distinction between the following segments: (i) accident and sickness;
        (ii) motor vehicle; (iii) property; (iv) marine, aviation and transport ("MAT"); (v)
        liability; (vi) credit and suretyship; and (vii) travel, while the exact product market
        definitions has been left open.8
(25)    The Commission has in a number of decisions acknowledged that there is a degree
        of supply-side substitutability in the non-life insurance segment as the conditions for
        insurance of different types of risks are similar and most large insurance companies
        are active in multiple risk types of policies.9
(26)    Hoewever, the Commission has considered that there is limited substitutablily
        between the different categories of policy offered from the point of view of insured
        customers, although it is frequent that in the same policy different risks are covered.
        As the non-life insurance products are not necessarily substitutable from the
        demande side, the market could potentially be divided into as many products as there
        are different risks.10
(27)    In any event, the exact product market definition in relation to non-life insurance can
        be left open in this case, as the proposed transaction does not raise competition
        concerns irrespective of the precise product market definition.
                 5.1.3   Reinsurance
(28)    The Commission has in the past distinguished the market for reinsurance from those
        for life and non-life insurance and defined the reinsurance services market as market
        for providing insurance cover to another party (the insurer) for part or all of the
        liability assumed by it under a policy or policies of insurance which it has issued.11
        However, the Commission has so far left open the question whether reinsurance
        constitutes a single relevant product market or whether it should be further
        subdivided into life and non-life segments.12
(29)    In any event, the exact product market definition in relation to reinsurance can be left
        open in this case, as the proposed transaction does not raise competition concerns
        irrespective of the precise product market definition.
8  Case No. COMP/M.6521 - Talanx International / Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance / Warta, Case No
   COMP/M.4284 – AXA / Winterthur; COMP/M.4701 – Generali / PPF Insurance Business.
9  Case No COMP/M.4713 – Aviva / Hamilton.
10 COMP/M.4284 –AXA / Winterthur.
11 Case No COMP/M.4284 – AXA / Winterthur.
12 Case No COMP/M.5083 - Groupama/OTP Garancia, Case No COMP/M.6053 – CVC / Apollo /
   BritInsurance.
                                                    5

        5.2      Geographic Market Definitions
                 5.2.1   Life insurance
(30)    The Commission in its previous decisions has considered the geographic market for
        life insurance and its segments to be national in scope due to differing regulatory
        frameworks, differing distribution structures and established brands. However, the
        exact product market definition has been left open.13
(31)    The Notifying Parties agree that the life insurance has a national dimension but
        submit that the consolidation of the freedom to provide services in the European
        Union and the harmonization of the legislation between Member States could
        ultimately even lead to a market definition wider than national.
(32)    In any event, the exact geographic market definition in relation to life insurance can
        be left open in this case, as the proposed transaction does not raise competition
        concerns irrespective of the precise geographic market definition.
                 5.2.2   Non-life insurance
(33)    With regard to the geographic scope of non-life insurance market and its various
        subsegments, the Commission has generally considered these markets as national,14
        with the exception (i) of large commercial risks, such as the insurance of aerospace
        risks, which is most likely to be at least EEA-wide in scope15 and, (ii) with respect to
        MAT16 insurance,17 which is likely to be wider than national for large/multinational
        corporate customers and large risks respectively. However, the Commission finally
        left the exact scope of the geographic market open.
(34)    The Notifying Parties consider that the non-life insurance market is national in scope
        and underline the fact that the consolidation of the freedom to provide services could
        lead to a wider market definition in the future.
(35)    In any event, the exact geographic market definition in relation to non-life insurance
        can be left open in this case, as the proposed transaction does not raise competition
        concerns irrespective of the precise geographic market definition.
                 5.2.3   Reinsurance
(36)    As regards reinsurance, the Commission has previously defined this market to be
        global due to the need to pool risks on a worldwide basis.18 The Notifying Parties
        accept the Commission's approach.
13 Cases No. COMP/M.6521 - Talanx International / Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance / Warta, No
   COMP/M.5075 - Vienna Insurance Group / EBV; Case No COMP/M.5057 – Aviva / UBI Vita.
14 Case No COMP/M.4284 AXA / Winterthur.
15 Case No COMP/M.5010 - Berkshire Hathaway / Munich RE / GAUM.
16 Marine, Aviation and Transport.
17 Case No COMP/M.2676 Sampo / Varma Sampo / If Holding / JV, Case No COMP/M.4284
   AXA/Winterthur, COMP/M.1082 - Allianz / AGF; Case No COMP/M.3556 FORTIS / BCP, Case No
   COMP/M.5010 - Berkshire Hathaway / Munich RE / GAUM.
18 Case No COMP/M.5925 MetLife / Alico / Delam; Case No COMP/M.5083, Groupama / OTP Garancia;
   Case No COMP/M.4059 Swiss Re / GE Insurance Solutions; Case No COMP/M.6053 - CVC / Apollo /
   Brit Insurance.
                                                    6

(37)     In any event, the exact geographic market definition in relation to reinsurance can be
         left open in this case, as the proposed transaction does not raise competition
         concerns irrespective of the precise geographic market definition.
         5.3      Competitive Assessment
(38)     The sole affected market as a result of the proposed transaction is the life insurance
         market in Spain and some of its subsegments. Specifically, the Notifying Parties'
         combined market shares exceed 15% on the investment products market ([10-20]%
         in 2012) and on the market for life insurance for individuals ([10-20]% in 2012).
(39)     In addition, limited horizontal overlaps occur in Poland in relation to the life
         insurance and non-life insurance production markets (less than 10%). There are also
         limited horizontal and vertical overlaps in the Netherlands where Aegon Group is
         active in insurance production and distribution and Santander has limited presence at
         the distribution level.
(40)     While there are also limited vertical overlaps between the Notifying Parties'
         activities in the United Kingdom where Aegon Group is active in the area of
         insurance production whereas the Santander Group is present at the insurance
         distribution level, no vertically affected market would arise as a result of the
         proposed transction.
(41)     Finally, a minor horizontal overlap occurs on the reinsurance market at the EEA
         level which does not give rise to an affected market (less than 5%).
         The market for life insurance in Spain
(42)     The Parties' combined market share would remain below 15% on the life insurance
         market with the following exceptions: (i) Spanish investment products market ([10-
         20]% combined market share, with an increment of [0-5]% in 2012)19 and (ii)
         Spanish life insurance products for individuals ([10-20]% combined market share,
         with an increment of [0-5]% in 2012 ).
(43)     On these segments, the combined market shares and the increments remain limited.
         Moreover, Santander Vida will face competition from Grupo Caixa, the market
         leader in the Spanish life insurance market ([10-20]% market share in 2012), and
         many other local and international (but locally active) players ([60-70] % aggregated
         market share in 2012). Indeed,in Spain, Grupo Caixa held a market share of [20-
         30]% in the investment products market in 2012 and [10-20]% in the life insurance
         products for individuals in 2012. The other market players held an aggregated
         market share of [60-70]% in the Spanish investment products market in 2012, among
         which Mapfre ([10-20]%), BBVA Seguros ([5-10]%), Ibercaja ([0-5]%) and [60-
         70]% in the Spanish life insurance products for individuals in 2012, among which
         Mapfre ([5-10]%), BBVA Seguros ([5-10]%) and Aviva ([5-10]%).
(44)     The Notifying Parties submit that barriers to entry into this market are rather limited,
         in particular due to low customer switching costs, lack of brand loyalty, relatively
         easy access to distribution network, and increasing market transparency. They also
19   "Increment" here and elsewhere in this decision refers to an increase to the market share previously held
   by Santander alone.
                                                          7

       emphasised the fact that at least three companies entered the market in the last five
       years.20
(45)   Taking into consideration the level of the combined market shares (below 20% in all
       market segments) and the number and the strength of the other competitors active in
       the market, the proposed transaction is unlikely to raise serious doubts as to its
       compatibility with the internal market as far as Spanish life insurance market or any
       of its subsegments are concerned.
6.   CONCLUSION
(46)   For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
       notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
       EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
       Merger Regulation.
                                                        For the Commission
                                                        (signed)
                                                        Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                        Vice-President
20 Permaat, Aseq Vida and Murimar Bankinter, all of them active in both investment products and life
   insurance products for individuals.
                                                   8
