                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                      Brussels, 11.10.2013
                                                                      C(2013) 6846 final
 In the published version of this decision, some                                 PUBLIC VERSION
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                           MERGER PROCEDURE
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.
                                                                      To the Notifying Parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case No COMP/M.6967 – BNP Paribas Fortis/ Belgacom/ Belgian Mobile
                Wallet JV
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
1.     On 6 September 2013, the European Commission received a notification of a proposed
       concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which BNP Paribas
       Fortis SA/NV ("BNP Paribas Fortis") and Belgacom SA/NV ("Belgacom") acquire
       within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint control over a
       newly created company constituting a joint venture (the "Belgian Mobile Wallet JV",
       or the "BMWallet JV") by way of purchase of shares. BNP Paribas Fortis and
       Belgacom are designated hereinafter as the "Notifying Parties".
I.     THE PARTIES
2.     BNP Paribas Fortis is the Belgian subsidiary of the French financial group BNP
       Paribas. It provides banking and financial services in Belgium. It is organised around
       four core activities: Retail & Private Banking, Corporate & Public Banking, Corporate &
       Investment Banking; and Investment Solutions.
3.     Belgacom is a telecommunications operator in Belgium providing wholesale and retail
       services, fixed and mobile telecommunications, voice, and data services. Belgacom is an
       autonomous public-sector company listed on the Brussels stock exchange.
1      OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
       the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the
       replacement of "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The terminology
       of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
Commission européenne, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE / Europese Commissie, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË. Tel.: +32 229-91111.

4. BmWallet JV will be active in the creation, operation and maintenance in Belgium of a
   mobile wallet solution specifically for smartphones (the BmWallet).
5. The BmWallet will exist online (as a programme / web service) or consist of a mobile
   application (App) accessible to any smartphone user with a mobile data subscription
   from a Mobile Network Operator (MNO) or a Mobile Virtual Network Operator
   (MVNO) (together M(V)NOs) active in Belgium. Within the BmWallet there will be one
   or several retail payment wallets which in turn will give access to payment cards stored
   within each payment wallet. The consumer will be able to use these cards to transact
   mobile payments through the payment wallets.
6. The payment wallets can be operated by financial institutions (for example BNP Paribas
   Fortis, ING or Belfius) using wholesale payment wallet platforms such as MasterPass or
   V.me or using independent retail wallets, over the top ("OTT") players (such as Google),
   payment schemes (such as PayPal), M(V)NOs in Belgium or others. The cornerstone of
   the BmWallet is a Mobile ID that will be securely stored on a web-based server (and in a
   second phase, on the SIM card) and through which end users will have access to a range
   of services (mobile payments, couponing, ticketing and loyalty programmes).
7. The BmWallet does not enable mobile payments in itself. In order to enable mobile
   payments, the BmWallet will have to be linked with a retail payment wallet. At the initial
   phase, the BmWallet will accept retail payment wallets that have been developed on the
   basis of the MasterPass wholesale wallet platform of MasterCard. BNP Paribas Fortis
   has expressed its intent to launch a BNP retail payment wallet on the basis of the
   MasterPass platform. In the future, the BmWallet is also expected, according to the
   Notifying Parties, to be connected to other retail payment wallets.2
                                  Figure 1: Structure of BmWallet JV
8. The BmWallet ecosystem will connect three main sets of market players:
   i.      The end-users ("Consumers"), who may download the BmWallet App for free3
           on their smartphones and who will connect the App to the retail payment wallet
2  The BmWallet can be considered as a "container" wallet, which will have to be filled in with several
   applications in order to offer customers a range of services such as mobile payment, couponing,
   ticketing and loyalty programs. For the processing of payments, the Bmwallet will need to be connected
   to one or more retail payment wallets offered by banks, such as a MasterPass-based retail payment
   wallet of BNP Paribas Fortis, or a MasterPass-based retail payment wallet of ING, or Belfius, etc.
   Customers will be able to upload their payment card details into one or more of these retail payment
   wallets.
3  The BmWallet JV will not generate any revenue from offering its App to Consumers.
                                                   2

           (for example a BNP Paribas Fortis retail payment wallet or a Belfius or ING
           retail payment wallet created on the basis of the MasterPass wholesale
           platform). Downloading the App will allow Consumers to obtain a user account,
           a secure PIN code for completing transactions, information on stored tickets and
           coupons, information on loyalty programmes and the possibility to manage their
           user profile and preferences.
    ii.    The merchants and retailers (for example restaurants, transport companies,
           cinemas, M(V)NOs, banks, etc) (together the "Service Users"), that will pay a
           fee to the BmWallet JV in order to transact with the Consumers via the
           BmWallet App, use the Apps storage facility or couponing service. These will
           obtain access to the BmWallet App's secure infrastructure through an open
           Application Programming Interface ("API") to be embedded in their individual
           mobile App.
    iii.   The payment providers such as banks, advertising / marketing service providers
           such as coupon companies, other online ticketing and loyalty service providers
           (together the "Service Providers"), that will be offering their services through
           the App to both Consumers and Service Users. Service Providers can be
           described as partners of the BmWallet JV within the mobile wallet ecosystem.
           Service Providers will not be paying a fee to the BmWallet.
9.  The Notifying Parties provide a concrete example: Supermarket Delhaize and fast
    food restaurant Quick can be characterised as Service Users. They will use the
    BmWallet to offer their products / services and will pay a fee to the BmWallet in order
    to transact with Consumers on a per transaction basis. In that context, Consumers may
    use the BmWallet to redeem coupons distributed, for instance, by Coca-Cola (so
    called open coupons). In addition, Service Users, such as Delhaize and Quick could
    also offer closed coupons (that is coupons that could only be used, respectively, within
    the Delhaize or Quick environment). In that case, Delhaize or Quick could either use
    one of the coupon Service Providers in the BmWallet ecosystem or create their own
    coupon themselves. Even in the latter case, they would not be considered a Service
    Provider as they would only be creating coupons for their own purposes.
10. In order to begin enjoying the services offered by the BmWallet, Consumers will have
    to do the following:
    i.     create a mobile payment wallet on which they store their payment card details;
    ii.    download for free the standalone BmWallet App and create a user account with
           a secure ID;
    iii.   link their BmWallet to their payment wallet and;
    iv.    download the App of the merchant with whom they wish to transact.
11. The BmWallet APIs will also be embedded in participating merchant's Apps, as such
    allowing to complete a full shopping progress "in-App" in a convenient and safe way.
                                             3

                 Figure 2: In-app shopping process (source: Notifying Parties)
12. Today, the following transaction steps are already possible in merchant Apps:
    i.   Consumers can browse for products / services (step 1 in Figure 2)
    ii.  Consumers can confirm a shopping cart (step 2 in Figure 2).
13. According to the Notifying Parties, the BmWallet will enable to complete the entire
    shopping process, including:
    i.   Mobile ID to be verified: the Mobile ID allows a user to be identified once and
         for all services in his or her mobile wallet and enables identification across
         multiple services (steps 3 and 5 in Figure 2).
    ii.  Coupons to be used: coupons that the user has downloaded or received will be
         automatically deducted during the purchase (step 4 in Figure 2).
    iii. Payments to be executed: the user will be able to monitor the status of the
         loyalty programmes to which he has subscribed, including adding, consulting
         and using loyalty points (step 6 in Figure 2).
    iv.  Tickets to be distributed and stored: tickets purchased for later user (such as
         "jump" ticket from the Brussels public transport company STIB) can be stored
         within the merchant App and / or within the ticketing module of the BmWallet
         App. (step 7 in Figure 2)
14. According to the Notifying Parties, the BmWallet process will operate as follows:
    i.   The Service User App's server calls the BmWallet's JV server and the
         BmWallet's App server.
    ii.  The BmWallet App's server in turn calls the BmWallet JV's server, then
         receives information from the BmWallet JV that allows it to display a PIN entry
         screen.
    iii. When the Consumer enters his PIN, the BmWallet App sends the PIN to the
         BmWallet JV server.
    iv.  The JV's server verifies the PIN (authentication stage).
    v.   This launches a Masterpass transaction, which involves several steps:
    vi.  The BmWallet JV server calls the payment services provider (such as Ogone):
                                            4

                a. The transaction is routed through the credit card service provider (such
                   as MasterCard);
                b.The transaction is communicated to the financial institution (such as
                   BNP Paribas Fortis);
                c. BNP Paribas Fortis requests BmWallet JV's confirmation that the PIN
                   (linking the Consumer to the payment wallet) is correct;
                d.BNP Paribas Fortis sends instruction to MasterCard to open the wallet
                   page on MasterPass;
                e. The BmWallet JV then receives a URL to open the MasterPass cards
                   page via a built-in browser.
15. According to the Notifying parties, the BmWallet can be described to operate in a two
    sided market. Service Providers will provide services that are aimed to attract
    Consumers. The widespread adoption of the wallet by Consumers will in turn attract
    Service Users (such as merchants) which will pay a transaction fee to the BmWallet
    JV.
II. THE OPERATION
16. The proposed concentration consists of the creation of a joint venture, the BmWallet
    JV, by BNP Paribas Fortis and Belgacom.
1.  Joint control
17. Each of the Notifying Parties will own 50% of BmWallet JV's shares. They will each
    appoint an equal number of directors of the board (2 each, 4 in total). Decisions of the
    board will require the approval of all directors (present or represented), […].4
    Similarly, decisions at the level of the shareholders' meeting will require the
    unanimous consent of all shareholders present or represented.
18. Accordingly, the Commission concludes that the Notifying Parties will exercise joint
    control over the BmWallet JV.
2.  Full functionality
19. The BmWallet JV will perform all of the functions of an autonomous economic entity
    with respect to the provision of various services addressed to businesses and final
    consumers in Belgium. The BmWallet JV will have its own management dedicated to
    its day-to-day operations and its own staff. The BmWallet JV is expected to employ
    […] Full Time Employees in 2014. Initially, the employees will be seconded to the
    BmWallet JV […]. The BmWallet JV will be able to replace any seconded employees
    who chose to return to their previous position with external employees. In addition,
    the BmWallet JV will have direct access to external sources of funding, and will be
    the owner of the assets needed to conduct its business activities. Moreover, it will
    have sufficient resources to operate independently on the market, and its activities will
    go beyond the execution of specific functions within the Notifying Parties business
4   […].
                                             5

     activities. Finally, the BmWallet JV will generate its own revenue independently from
     the Notifying Parties.
20.  Its contemplated services will be mainly offered to third parties. Any services that the
     BmWallet JV may be offering to the Notifying Parties will be minor in comparison to
     its overall activities (for instance advertising and data analytics services to the
     Notifying Parties) and will be provided at […]. Finally, the BmWallet JV's
     shareholders agreement is concluded for a […].
21.  Accordingly, the Commission concludes that the BmWallet JV is a full-function joint
     venture performing on a lasting basis all the functions of an autonomous economic
     entity.
3.   Conclusion
22.  The proposed transaction therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of
     Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
III. EU DIMENSION
23.  The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 000 million5 [BNP Paribas Fortis: EUR […]; Belgacom: EUR 6 415
     million]. Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million [BNP
     Paribas Fortis: EUR […]; Belgacom: EUR […]], but they do not achieve more than
     two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member
     State.
24.  The proposed concentration therefore has an EU dimension within the meaning of
     Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
IV.  THE RELEVANT MARKETS
25.  The transaction takes place in the new but fast growing sector of Mobile Commerce
     ("MCommerce"), which encompasses retail mobile payments, mobile advertising, data
     analytics and ticket storage services.
26.  According to the Commission's Green Paper "Towards and integrated European
     market for card, internet and mobile payments"6, mobile payments are payments for
     which the payment data and the payment instruction are initiated, transmitted or
     confirmed via a mobile phone or device. This can apply to online or offline purchases
     of services, digital or physical goods.
27.  Mobile payments can be classified into two main categories:
     i.      Remote mobile payments mostly take place through internet / wireless
             application protocol (WAP) or through premium SMS services which are billed
             to the payer through the MNO. Most remote mobile payments through the
             internet are currently based on card payment schemes. Other solutions, based on
5    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
     Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.04.2008, p. 1).
6    http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2011:0941:FIN:EN:PDF (the "Green
     Paper").
                                                    6

            credit transfers or direct debits, are technically feasible and possibly as secure,
            efficient and competitive, but seem to have difficulties entering the market.
    ii.     Proximity payments generally take place directly at the point of sale. Using
            Near Field Communication ("NFC"), the leading proximity technology at this
            stage, payments require specifically equipped phones which can be recognised
            when put near a reader module at the point of sale (such as stores, public
            transport, parking spaces).7
1.  Market for the retail distribution of mobile wallet services
1.1 Product market definition
    The Notifying Parties' view
28. First, the Notifying Parties consider that the BmWallet JV will not be active in the
    potential wholesale market for the supply of platform services for digital (online /
    mobile) wallets.8 Instead, the BmWallet JV will be active on the retail level as it will
    provide mobile wallet services to end users. As a result, according to the Notifying
    Parties, the BmWallet JV will compete in the market for the retail distribution of
    mobile wallet services.
29. Second, the Notifying Parties explain that the BmWallet JV will not in and of itself
    offer Consumers the ability to transact payments. Rather, the BmWallet technology
    will enable payments via one or several retail payment wallets. The Notifying Parties
    have stated that they intend to accept a number of retail payment wallets. Initially,
    these will be based on the MasterPass wholesale wallet platform but in the future, they
    might be based on different wholesale platforms, such as the V.me wholesale wallet
    platform of Visa. BNP Paribas Fortis expects to launch a retail payment wallet on the
    basis of the wholesale MasterPass platform.9 The Notifying Parties consider that the
    BmWallet, connected to a payment wallet, will be a viable substitute for other similar
    mobile wallet solutions.
30. Third, the Notifying Parties consider that the BmWallet JV will compete with
    companies that are already established in the provision of online / mobile wallet
    payment solutions, including PayPal, Google and Visa or MasterCard. The
    Commission notes that Visa's V.me and MasterCard's MasterPass are both wholesale
    mobile wallet platforms. Therefore it will be the retail payment wallets of banks or
    other players that will compete with the BmWallet JV.
31. The Notifying Parties submit that a consumer wishing to make purchases from its
    mobile handset in a convenient and secure way will have the choice between
    completing its transaction online within a payment website and doing so from mobile
    App of a mobile wallet, where such an option is available. According to the Notifying
    Parties, both solutions offer the same speed and convenience of payment.
    Furthermore, from a supply-side perspective, the Notifying Parties are of the opinion
    that the majority of companies currently offering online payment solutions (such as
7   Green Paper, section 2.4.
8   See Paragraph 36 below.
9   Notifying Parties' replies of 27 September 2013 to the Commission's email of 26 September 2013 in
    relation to the operation of the MasterPass wallet platform and the BNP Paribas Fortis retail payment
    wallet.
                                                   7

    wallets)s already also offer an equivalent mobile payment solution or are in the
    process of developing one (for instance PayPal).
32. While the Notifying Parties do not exclude that mobility may play a role in the
    substitutability between static online and mobile methods of payment, they submit that
    mobility is not, as such, a factor that prevents any substitutability between mobile and
    static payment solutions. In essence, wallet based payment solutions in a mobile
    environment allow consumers to pay in advance, and / or on the go. Whilst payment
    solutions in a static environment do not allow for a payment on the go, they still allow
    consumers to pay in advance under the same conditions as in a mobile environment,
    and are to that extent substitutable.
33. Hence, according to the Notifying Parties, the market for the retail distribution of
    mobile wallets to consumers is part of a wider market including online wallet services.
    Nevertheless, for the purpose of the present concentration, they consider that it can be
    left open whether online wallet solutions are part of the same market as mobile wallet
    solutions, as the proposed concentration would not significantly impede effective
    competition under any alternative product market definition.
34. Finally, the Notifying Parties submit that the BmWallet will not allow for offline
    proximity payments using NFC technology at points of sale such as inside shops, but
    will allow for in-app payment, wherever the customer is located (that is to say not
    necessarily inside a shop).
35. In any event, the Notifying Parties submit that it can be left open whether these
    different types of mobile payments are part of the same relevant market, as the
    proposed concentration would not significantly impede effective competition under
    any alternative product market definition.
    The Commission's assessment
36. Commission precedents. The Commission reviewed the mobile payments markets in
    its decision in the case of Telefonica UK/ Vodafone UK/ Everything Everywhere/ JV
    (the "MCommerce" decision)10 and more recently in the Spanish mobile wallet
    decision, Telefónica / Banco Santander / CaixaBank JV11(the "Spanish mobile wallet"
    decision). The wallets in these precedents have similarities but also important
    differences to the BmWallet. The Commission has considered these in its assessment.
37. In the MCommerce decision, the Commission considered the existence of two
    separate, vertically related markets: (i) the market for the wholesale supply of
    platform services for digital wallets, and (ii) the market for the retail distribution of
    mobile wallet services. The MCommerce decision involved the wholesale supply of
    platform services for digital wallets, contrary to the BmWallet JV which is a retail
    mobile wallet. The Commission finally left open the exact product market definition,
    since the operation did not lead to any significant impediment to effective competition
    under any of the alternative market definitions.
10  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 - Telefonica UK/Vodafone
    UK/Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraphs 91 to 102.
11  See Commission decision of 14 August 2013 in Case No COMP/M.6956 - Telefónica / Banco
    Santander / CaixaBank / JV, paragraphs 15 to 55.
                                                  8

38. In the same decision, the Commission also examined whether the retail distribution of
    mobile wallet services (including both offline and online mobile payments) constitutes
    a market separate from existing online payment services (through credit / debit cards /
    PayPal etc), via the internet on a static PC, tablet, or on a mobile handset. While it
    considered that current existing methods of online payments and mobile payments
    may belong to different relevant product markets, the Commission ultimately left the
    question open.12 Similarly, in the Spanish mobile wallet decision, the Commission
    considered that the retail distribution of digital wallet services can be distinguished as
    a separate market, or at least, as a separate segment from other existing (online and
    offline) means of payment but ultimately left the precise product market definition
    open.
39. In addition, the Commission examined in the MCommerce decision whether the retail
    distribution of mobile wallet services (including both offline and online mobile
    payments) constitutes a separate market from existing offline payment services (NFC-
    enabled credit and debit cards and traditional means of payment such as credit, debit
    cards and cash). The MCommerce wallet platform involved both remote and proximity
    services, whereas the BmWallet will only have a remote functionality. While it
    considered that mobile payments are likely to continue to coexist in the foreseeable
    future with non-mobile means of payment including NFC and non NFC-enabled credit
    and debit cards, the Commission ultimately left the question open.13
40. Finally, the Commission examined in the MCommerce decision whether the market
    for the retail distribution of mobile wallet services should itself be further subdivided
    between offline and online mobile payments services. While it considered that online
    and offline mobile payments are likely not part of the same relevant product market, at
    least at present, and while the evolution in the short to medium term is not entirely
    clear, the Commission ultimately left the question open.14
41. The Commission notes that the MCommerce wallet had the ability to transact
    payments, whereas the BmWallet will only allow payments through an independent
    mobile payment wallet. Despite the factual differences, a number of findings in the
    MCommerce decision are relevant for the present decision too.
42. Results of the market investigation in the present case. As a general remark, the
    Commission considered at the time of the MCommerce decision that the retail
    distribution of mobile wallet services is a nascent market whose main features and
    borderlines are still to be defined. This finding was confirmed by the result of the
    market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration. A
    number of respondents expressed the view that it is difficult to define the exact scope
    of the rapidly evolving payment landscape with new innovative technologies and
    platforms being developed all the time. As a result, the Commission notes that no
    clear consensus cutting across the different types of respondents (financial institutions,
    card schemes, mobile network operators or competing mobile wallet providers)
    emerges as concerns the definition of the relevant markets. Nonetheless, the results of
    the market investigation is summarised in the following paragraphs.
12  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 – Telefonica UK/Vodafone
    UK/Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraph 127.
13  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 - Telefonica UK/Vodafone
    UK/Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraph, 135.
14  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 - Telefonica UK/Vodafone
    UK/Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraph 139.
                                                9

43. Mobile payments versus existing online payments. A slight majority of respondents
    considered that mobile payments (including both offline and online mobile payments)
    constitute a separate market from existing online payments (that is to say payment
    through credit and debit cards, PayPal, via the internet on a static PC, tablet, or mobile
    handset).15 The Green Paper states that the definitions of the different types of
    payments, in particular for remote mobile payments, suggest that the line between
    electronic payments and mobile payments is blurred and may become even more so in
    the future.16
44. On one hand, a number of these respondents explained that the specific characteristics
    of mobile payments (such as the ease of use, user friendliness and convenience for
    shoppers) as opposed to the other means of payment, including existing online
    payments, placed mobile payments into a separate market. Also from a merchant
    perspective, a number of respondents explain that all these different types of payments
    are likely to continue to co-exist in the foreseeable future. Hence, they should be seen
    as complementary rather than substitutable.
45. On the other hand, a minority of the respondents considered that the different
    technologies for payment that are available will further blur the distinctions between
    traditional and non-traditional means of payment, and eventually converge over time.
46. Mobile payments versus existing offline payments. The results of the market
    investigation were mixed as regards the question whether mobile payments (including
    both offline and online mobile payments) constitute a separate market from existing
    offline payments (traditional or NFC-enabled credit and debit cards or cash at the
    point of sale).17 Mobile wallets facilitate mobile payments by allowing virtual cards to
    be uploaded and stored safely on them and by processing the transactions through a
    payment service provider (PSP), such as Ogone. Again, the same arguments as the
    ones used in paragraphs 44 and 45 above as regards a possible distinction between the
    markets for mobile payments and existing online payments were considered by
    respondents to apply to the possible distinction between the markets for mobile
    payment and existing offline payments.
47. Offline versus online mobile wallet services. A slight majority of respondents
    considered that offline mobile wallet services (via NFC-enabled mobile devices at the
    point of sale) and online mobile wallet services (via mobile wallets such as the retail
    applications of the MasterPass and V.Me wallets, or Google Wallet) are part of the
    same market.18
15  See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
    question 5; to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September 2013, question 5; to Questionnaire
    Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6 September 2013, question 5; and to Questionnaire Q4 to
    suppliers of 6 September 2013, question 5.
16  Green paper, section 2.4
17  See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
    question 6; to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September 2013, question 6; to Questionnaire
    Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6 September 2013, question 6; and to Questionnaire Q4 to
    suppliers of 6 September 2013, question 6.
18  See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
    question 7; to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September 2013, question 7; to Questionnaire
    Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6 September 2013, question 7; and to Questionnaire Q4 to
    suppliers of 6 September 2013, question 7.
                                                 10

48. As one respondent explained, consumer demand is towards one integrated solution
    whereby different payment methods (such as the physical Europay, MasterCard, Visa
    card ("EMV"), physical NFC card, NFC-enabled smartphones, online and even Quick
    Response ("QR") based systems) link to one single mobile wallet. Another respondent
    explained that although the technology allowing online payments through a mobile
    wallet in stores remains in its infancy, a number of pilot projects are being carried out
    and as this technology develops, it will be likely regarded as belonging to the same
    market as making offline payment though an NFC-enabled mobile wallet. A third
    respondent submitted that both payment methods belong to different markets because
    offline mobile wallet services require NFC-enabled point of sale terminals, unlike
    online mobile wallet services. However, a fourth respondent explained that the price
    of point of sale terminals is rapidly decreasing and that merchants will soon be able to
    buy point of sale terminals which will allow them to choose how customers can pay in
    their stores (via either offline or online mobile wallet services).
49. Mobile wallets versus payment wallets. The results of the market investigation were
    mixed as regards the question whether mobile wallets such as the BmWallet (which
    do not by themselves enable payments but instead need to be connected to a payment
    wallet to do so) and payment wallets are part of the same product market.19
50. On one hand, a number of respondents argue that the scope of services offered by a
    mobile wallet is wider than the one offered by a pure payment wallet, as it also offers
    additional services such as the storage and offering of loyalty cards, tickets, coupons,
    etc. Furthermore, according to these respondents, whereas a payment wallet will need
    to be linked to one "banking company", the mobile wallet can contain multiple
    payment wallets.
51. On the other hand, a number of respondents argued that from the perspective of
    merchants, to the extent that a mobile wallet does offer a payment functionality
    (which is the case of the BmWallet which will be connected to retail MasterPass
    payment wallets for example), it would likely to be the same market as payment
    wallets.
52. Conclusions. In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact
    delineation of the relevant product market for the retail distribution of mobile wallet
    services can be left open since the proposed concentration does not raise competition
    concerns under any possible market definition.
1.2 Geographic market definition
    The Notifying Parties' view
53. The Notifying Parties submit that the geographic market is at least national in scope,
    although they state that some of the most important online players are multinational
    companies (such as Google, PayPal, Amazon and Apple) which are offering – or
    could easily offer – mobile wallets worldwide.
19  See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
    question 8; to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September 2013, question 8; to Questionnaire
    Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6 September 2013, question 8; and to Questionnaire Q4 to
    suppliers of 6 September 2013, question 8.
                                                 11

    The Commission's assessment
54. In the MCommerce decision, the Commission indicated that the market for the retail
    distribution of mobile wallet services to customers seems to be at least national in
    scope, but it ultimately left the geographic market definition open.20
55. In the present case, the results of the market investigation were mixed.21 On one hand,
    several respondents explained that the geographic scope was wider than national.
    Notably, one respondent explained that to the extent that at least one international
    payment instrument is stored within the mobile wallet, it could be used for
    international payments. Others explained that they were not aware of any material
    specific national or regional differences for the use of mobile payments in Belgium.
56. On the other hand, other respondents explained that that the geographic scope was
    national. In particular, one respondent pointed out that the profile and activities of
    Belgacom and BNP Paribas/Fortis as JV partners imply a strong national focus of the
    offer of mobile wallet services by the BmWallet JV. Another respondent stated that
    there is no uniform European tariff for mobile payments, which can therefore differ
    from Member State to Member State.
57. In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact delineation of the
    relevant geographic market for the retail distribution of mobile wallet services can be
    left open since the proposed concentration does not raise competition concerns under
    any possible market definition.
2.  Digital advertising services
2.1 Product market definition
    The Notifying Parties' view
58. According to the Notifying Parties, the BmWallet JV will act as an intermediary for
    the sale of mobile advertising inventory. In particular, the BmWallet JV will be active
    in the distribution of mobile coupons, thus connecting Consumers to advertisers and
    other merchants (the Service Users) on one hand, and to couponing companies (the
    Service Providers) on the other hand.
59. The types of advertising services to be offered by the BmWallet JV will include push
    coupon offers, that is to say opt-in offers distributed to Consumers based on their prior
    consent to receive such offers; and pull coupon offers, that is to say offers made
    through a "coupon wall" where consumers can go and "pull" out the offers they want
    to add to their wallets for future use. Service Users whose coupons are being
    distributed (for instance Coca Cola, Quick, etc.) will be charged per coupon by the
    BmWallet JV. The BmWallet JV will not be active in targeted marketing messages.
60. The Notifying Parties submit that the relevant product market is the market for digital
    (online and mobile) advertising. They consider that mobile and online advertising are
20  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 – Telefonica UK/Vodafone
    UK/Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraph 224.
21  See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
    question 9; to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September 2013, question 9; to Questionnaire
    Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6 September 2013, question 9; and to Questionnaire Q4 to
    suppliers of 6 September 2013, question 9.
                                                 12

    more and more substitutable, such convergence being promoted by the increasingly
    blurred distinction between portable electronic devices connected to the internet and
    smartphones in terms of screen size and other features such as their usage and the
    availability of the same type of Apps for the two categories of devices.
61. However, for the purpose of the proposed concentration, the Notifying Parties submit
    that it can be left open whether online advertising is part of the same market as mobile
    advertising as the proposed concentration would not significantly impede effective
    competition under any alternative product market definition.
    The Commission's assessment
62. The Commission has in the past examined the market(s) for advertising services in a
    number of cases.
63. In relation to the advertising medium, in Google/Doubleclick,22 the Commission
    distinguished between the provision of online and offline advertising space. In
    Microsoft/Yahoo! Search Business,23 the Commission also considered the existence of
    a possible sub-market for mobile (search) advertising but left it open whether it is a
    separate market or falls within the wider market for online advertising. Similarly, in
    the MCommerce decision,24 the Commission acknowledged that the differences
    between mobile and online advertising may diminish at some point in the future and
    left open whether both services belonged to separate product markets.
64. As regards direct versus indirect sales, in Google/Doubleclick,25 the Commission
    defined a separate market for intermediation in online advertising in view of the fact
    that direct sales are not a substitute for the sales provided by intermediaries. The
    Commission acknowledged that ad networks are progressively becoming very close to
    the direct sales channels but concluded that these developments are still at a very
    initial stage and cannot be considered to be an established market trend. In the
    MCommerce decision,26 the Commission found that direct sales of mobile advertising
    constrain the sale through intermediaries to a significant extent but left open the
    decision whether there were separate or whether they were part of the same market.
65. Another potential sub-division relates to the type of advertising message. In
    Google/Doubleclick,27 the Commission left open the question whether the market for
    online advertising could be sub-segmented into search and non-search services. In the
    same case, the Commission also considered but left open whether mobile marketing
    messaging is a separate market from search and non-search mobile advertising. In the
22  See Commission decision of 11 March 2008 in Case No COMP/M.4731 – Google/Doubleclick,
    paragraphs 44 to 47.
23  See Commission decision of 18 February 2010 in Case No COMP/M.5727 – Microsoft/Yahoo! Search
    Business, paragraphs 61 to 81.
24  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 – Telefónica UK/Vodafone
    UK/ Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraphs 143 to 181.
25  See Commission decision of 11 March 2008 in Case No COMP/M.4731 – Google/Doubleclick,
    paragraphs 44 to 56.
26  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 – Telefónica UK/Vodafone
    UK/ Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraphs 174 to 181.
27  See Commission decision of 11 March 2008 in Case No COMP/M.4731 – Google/Doubleclick,
    paragraphs 48 to 56.
                                               13

    MCommerce decision,28 the Commission considered whether within mobile
    advertising, targeted marketing messaging (including push messages) constitutes a
    separate market from search and non-search advertising but left the market definition
    open.
66. The BmWallet JV will be active in the provision of online advertising services as an
    intermediate (ie not through direct sales). On the other hand, Belgacom offers limited
    digital advertising services directly. Therefore, if the provision of online advertising
    intermediation services constitutes a separate market to online advertising services
    through direct sales, then there will be no overlap between the activities of the
    BmWallet JV and the Notifying Parties.
67. The market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration did
    not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the previous findings of
    the Commission as regards the definition of the digital advertising services market(s).
68. In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact delineation of the
    relevant product market(s) for digital advertising services can be left open since the
    proposed concentration does not raise competition concerns under any possible market
    definition.
2.2 Geographic market definition
    The Notifying Parties' view
69. The Notifying Parties submit that the market(s) for digital advertising services are at
    least national in scope given that Service Users are active at least on a national level.
    The Commission's assessment
70. In the MCommerce decision, the Commission left open the exact geographic market
    definition as regards digital advertising services, although it indicated that some
    factors, such as customers' purchasing preferences and the presence of publishers
    through intermediaries located at national level, militate in favour of a national
    geographic dimension.29
71. The market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration did
    not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the previous findings of
    the Commission as regards the geographic scope of the digital advertising services
    market(s).
72. In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact delineation of the
    relevant geographic market(s) for digital advertising services can be left open since
    the proposed concentration does not raise competition concerns under any possible
    market definition.
28  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 – Telefónica UK/Vodafone
    UK/ Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraphs 160 to 165.
29  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 – Telefónica UK/Vodafone
    UK/ Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraphs 225 to 229.
                                               14

3.  Data analytics services
3.1 Product market definition
    The Notifying Parties' view
73. The Notifying Parties submit that as part of its advertising intermediation services, the
    BmWallet JV will be providing basic data analytics services to its Service Users (for
    example data on the activation and redemption of coupons, etc.). No separate fee will
    apply for such services; rather the cost will be part of the advertising intermediation
    fee.
74. According to the Notifying Parties, the BmWallet JV may in future also offer data
    analytics services to Service Users for a fee and as a standalone service. The
    BmWallet JV's data analytics activities would likely comprise two main elements:
    i.     reporting analytics such as aggregated statistical reports on the profile of
           shoppers; and
    ii.    business development analytics, such as prospecting analytics that enable
           Service Users to increase their customer base by identifying new potential
           customers.
75. On one hand, the Notifying Parties submit that a segmentation of the market for data
    analytics services on the basis of the type of service (market research services and
    marketing information services) is not appropriate. On the other hand, the Notifying
    Parties consider that a distinction according to the type of channel or media (mobile or
    online data analytics) is warranted.
    The Commission's assessment
76. In previous decisions, the Commission considered that marketing data services ("data
    analytics services") could be further segmented into
    i.     a market for marketing information services comprising the supply of data on
           individual consumers (for example age, social group, activities, consuming
           habits, address) for direct marketing purposes;
    ii.    a market for market research services (which aims at measuring and
           understanding consumer attitudes and actual purchasing behaviour and
           patterns), that could be further sub-divided by research type (consumer panel
           services, retail measurement services and customized market research); and
    iii.   a market for media measurement services, which are aimed at measuring the
           audience of specific media, such as television and internet.30
77. In the MCommerce decision,31 the Commission also assessed whether the provision of
    data analytics services for mobile advertising constitutes a separate product market. It
    considered that in principle the provision of data analytics services for static online
30  See Commission decision of 12 February 2001 in Case No COMP/M.229 – VNU/ACNielsen,
    paragraphs 10 to 12.
31  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 – Telefónica UK/Vodafone
    UK/ Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraphs 197 to 203.
                                               15

    advertising cannot be substituted by the provision of data analytics services for mobile
    advertising, both from the point of view of the advertisers buying these services and
    the data analytics providers. The Commission ultimately left open the exact product
    market definition in relation to data analytics services.
78. The market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration did
    not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the previous findings of
    the Commission as regards the definition of the digital advertising services market(s).
79. In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact delineation of the
    relevant product market(s) for data analytics services can be left open since the
    proposed concentration does not raise competition concerns under any possible market
    definition.
3.2 Geographic market definition
    The Notifying Parties' view
80. The Notifying Parties submit that the market for data analytics services is at least
    national in scope. However, the Notifying Parties state that not only most data
    analytics suppliers are global companies and the services are often provided on a
    cross-border basis, but global companies are also increasingly purchasing local
    companies. The market is thus being increasingly globalised.
    The Commission's assessment
81. In the MCommerce decision,32 the Commission left open the relevant geographic
    market definitions. On one hand, the Commission took into account the relevance of
    local presence, knowledge of the local markets and language as factors that could
    justify a national geographic definition. On the other hand, the Commission stated that
    most data analytics suppliers are multinational companies which offer cross-border
    services.
82. The market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration did
    not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the previous findings of
    the Commission as regards the geographic scope of the market(s) for data analytics
    services.
83. For the purposes of the present decision, the exact delineation of the relevant
    geographic market(s) for data analytics services can be left open since the proposed
    concentration does not raise competition concerns under any possible market
    definition.
4.  Ticket storage services
4.1 Product market definition
    The Notifying Parties' view
84. According to the Notifying Parties, the BmWallet JV will offer ticket storage services
    to Service Users (that is to say merchants) for a fee. This service will be offered on a
32  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 – Telefónica UK/Vodafone
    UK/ Everything Everywhere/JV, paragraphs 236 to 240.
                                               16

    standalone basis also to Service Users that do not have an App compatible with the
    BmWallet. The BmWallet JV may be offering its storage service through the
    intermediary of ticketing service providers (for instance Ticketmaster). Service
    providers would not be paying a fee.
85. This service will allow Service Users (and Ticketing Service Providers) that may not
    have their own App, or that cannot handle mobile ticket storage, to send electronic
    tickets to their customers for storage on the BmWallet. From a consumer's
    perspective, electronic tickets purchased from various Service Users can be securely
    stored in the single BmWallet App. It is intended that the digital tickets saved in the
    consumer's BmWallet would then be accessible at any point by the consumer (online
    or offline).
86. In contrast to Consumers who will not be charged for using the ticket storage service,
    Service Users will be charged. The fee to the Service Users will include delivery,
    storage and deletion of the ticket, the latter according to the Service User's
    instructions. The BmWallet JV intends to apply a fee only where storage is requested
    by the Service User within the ticketing module of the BmWallet App (as opposed to
    storage within the merchant App, to which a fee would not apply).
87. The Notifying Parties consider that a distinct market could exist for the provision of
    mobile ticket storage services and that this market is at least national in scope. In the
    potential market for the provision of mobile ticket storage services, the Notifying
    Parties consider that the BmWallet JV would compete with companies that are already
    active (albeit to a limited extent as the segment is nascent) on this market. These are
    for example Passbook by Apple which offers ticket storage services and Google
    Wallet by Google which has made public its intention to enter the ticket storage
    market in the near future.
88. In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact delineation of the
    relevant product market(s) for ticket storage services can be left open since the
    proposed concentration does not raise competition concerns under any possible market
    definition.
4.2   Geographic market definition
    The Notifying Parties' view
89. The Notifying Parties consider the geographic scope of the ticket storage services
    market to be at least national in scope.
    The Commission's assessment
90. The Commission has not so far analysed in its past precedents the existence of a
    specific separate market for the provision of mobile ticket storage services.
    Furthermore, in the present case, the market investigation did not allow drawing
    conclusions on the existence or not of a separate market for the provision of mobile
    ticket storage services, and on the geographic scope of this market.
91. In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact delineation of the
    relevant geographic market(s) for ticket storage services can be left open since the
    proposed concentration does not raise competition concerns under any possible market
    definition.
                                             17

92. Furthermore, as none of the Notifying Parties offer such ticket storage services, this
    market is not affected by the transaction and will, as a result, not be discussed any
    further in the present decision.
5.  Retail mobile telephony services
5.1 Product market definition
    The Notifying Parties' view
93. The Notifying Parties submit that in order to access the mobile wallet offered by the
    BmWallet JV, Consumers will need a retail mobile telephony services contract with
    an MNO. On this market, MNOs sell national and international voice calls, SMS
    (including MMS), mobile internet with data services and access to content via the
    mobile network to end customers. The provision of retail mobile telephony services
    therefore constitutes a complementary, neighbouring market to the retail provision of
    mobile wallet services or a vertical market in the case when the mobile wallets require
    access to the SIM-based SE.
94. The Notifying Parties consider that the retail mobile telephony services market
    constitutes one market, without any segmentation on the basis of the type of customer,
    the type of data or voice services provided, or the payment modalities (prepaid or
    post-paid).
    The Commission's assessment
95. In its previous decisions,33 the Commission has recognised the existence of a separate
    market for the provision of retail mobile telephony services. The Commission stated
    that the provision of retail mobile telephony services includes voice calls, SMS
    (including MMS), mobile internet with data services and access to content via the
    mobile network to end customers.34 However, the Commission has not defined
    separate markets by type of customers (corporate or private, post-pay subscribers or
    pre-paid customers) or by type of network technology (2G / GSM or 3G / UMTS).
96. The market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration did
    not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the previous findings of
    the Commission as regards the definition of the product market for the provision of
    retail mobile telephony services to end customers.
97. Therefore, in line with its past decisions, the Commission considers for the purpose of
    the present decision that the retail provision of mobile telephony services to end
    customers constitutes a separate product market.
33  See Commission decision of 12 December 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6497 - Hutchison 3G Austria /
    Orange Austria, paragraphs 32 to 46; Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No
    COMP/M.6314 – Telefónica UK/Vodafone UK/ Everything Everywhere/ JV, paragraph 206;
    Commission decision of 1 March 2012 in Case No COMP/M.5650 – T-Mobile/Orange, paragraph 24;
    Commission decision of 27 November 2007 in Case No COMP/M. 4947 – Vodafone/Tele2 Italy/Tele2
    Spain, paragraph 14; Commission decision of 26 April 2006 in Case No COMP/M.3916 – T-Mobile
    Austria/Tele ring, paragraph 18; Commission decision of 24 September 2004 in Case No
    COMP/M.3530 – TeliaSonera/Orange, paragraph 13; and Commission decision of 16 September 2003
    in Case No COMP/M.3245 – Vodafone/Singlepoint, paragraph 12.
34  See Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314 – Telefónica UK/Vodafone
    UK/ Everything Everywhere/ JV, paragraph 204.
                                               18

5.2  Geographic market definition
     The Notifying Parties' view
98.  The Notifying Parties did not discuss further the exact geographic scope of the market
     for the provision of retail mobile telephony services.
     The Commission's assessment
99.  In its previous decisions, the Commission has concluded that the market for the retail
     provision of mobile telephony services is national in scope.35
100. The results of the market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present
     concentration did not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the
     previous findings of the Commission as regards the geographic scope of the market
     for retail mobile telephony services.
101. Therefore, in line with its past decisions, the Commission considers for the purpose of
     the present decision that the geographic scope of the market for the retail provision of
     mobile telephony services to end customers is national.
6.   Provision of card payment services
6.1  Product market definition
     The Notifying Parties' view
102. The Notifying Parties explain that BNP Paribas Fortis is active in the issuing of
     payment cards. As a result, the services provided by BNP Paribas Fortis and the
     BmWallet JV may be considered complementary as the use of the BmWallet App for
     the purpose of transacting purchases necessarily implies the use of payment cards.
103. Nevertheless, because they consider that no vertical or conglomerate concerns can
     arise from the activity of BNP Paribas Fortis in the issuing of payment cards in the
     context of the proposed concentration, they do not discuss further the exact scope of
     the product market for the provision of card payment services.
     The Commission's assessment
104. In previous decisions, the Commission identified separate markets for payment card
     issuing market and for merchant acquiring.36
35   See Commission decision of 12 December 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6497 - Hutchison 3G Austria /
     Orange Austria, paragraph 73; Commission decision of 4 September 2012 in Case No COMP/M.6314
     – Telefónica UK/Vodafone UK/ Everything Everywhere/ JV, paragraph 240; Commission decisions in
     Case No COMP/M.5734 – Liberty Global Europe/ Unitymedia of 25 January 2010, paragraph 42; and
     Commission decision of 27 November 2007 in Case No COMP/M.4947 – Vodafone/Tele2 Italy/Tele2
     Spain, paragraph 16.
36   See Commission decision of 3 October 2008 in Case No COMP/M.5241 – American
     Express/Fortis/Alpha Card, paragraph 23; Commission decision of 3 October 2007 in Case No
     COMP/M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets, Commission decision of 2 June 2005 in Case No M.3740 –
     Barclays Bank/Foreningssparbanken/JV, paragraph. 11. In the context of antitrust proceeding see
     Commission decision of 19 December 2007 in Cases No COMP/34.579 – MasterCard, COMP/36.518 -
     EuroCommerce and COMP/38.580 – Commercial Cards.
                                                19

105. As regards the market for payment card issuing, in previous decisions, the
     Commission considered, but ultimately left open the question of whether the market
     should be further sub-divided into the following markets: (i) cards issued to
     households and cards issued to commercial customers; (ii) international and national
     cards; (iii) debit and credit cards; (iv) selective and general cards.37
106. As regards the merchant acquiring market, in previous decisions, the Commission
     indicated that the merchant acquiring market may be further subdivided according to
     the type of scheme organisation (international / domestic), customer type (consumer /
     commercial), type of card (debit / credit) or according to the brand (American Express
     Personal Green Card/Personal Gold Card / Personal Platinum Card / Corporate Card /
     Visa / Visa electron / V pay / MasterCard / Maestro, etc.).38
107. The market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration did
     not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the previous findings of
     the Commission as regards the definition of the markets for the provision of card
     payment services.
108. Therefore, in line with its past decisions, the Commission considers for the purpose of
     the present decision that the markets for the provision of card payment services
     constitutes a separate product market.
6.2  Geographic market definition
     The Notifying Parties' view
109. The Notifying Parties did not discuss further the exact geographic scope of the
     markets for the provision of card payment services.
     The Commission's assessment
110. As regards the market for payment card issuing, in previous decisions, the
     Commission has previously defined the market as being likely national in scope.39
111. As regards the merchant acquiring market, in previous decisions, the Commission has
     previously defined the market as being likely national in scope.40
37   See Commission decision of 3 October 2008 in Case No COMP/M.5241 –American
     Express/Fortis/Alpha Card; Commission decision of 29 September 2006 in Case No COMP/M.4316 -
     Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC, paragraphs 22 to 23; Commission decision of 18 October 2005 in Case No
     COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito/HVB, paragraph 13; Commission decision of 8 November 2001 in Case
     No COMP/M.2567 - Nordbanken/Postgirot, paragraphs 15 to 16.
38   See Commission decision of 3 October 2008 in Case No COMP/M.5241 –American
     Express/Fortis/Alpha Card ; Commission decision of 29 September 2006 in Case No COMP/M.4316 –
     Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC; Commission decision of 2 June 2005 in Case No M.3740 – Barclays
     Bank/Foreningssparbanken/JV; Commission decision of 8 November 2001 in NO Case COMP/M.2567
     – Nordbanken/Postgirot.
39   See Commission decision of 3 October 2007 in Case No COMP/M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets,
     paragraph 87; Commission decision of 2 June 2005 in Case No M.3740 – Barclays
     Bank/Foreningssparbanken/JV, paragraph 16; Commission decision of 8 November 2001 in Case No
     COMP/M.2567 - Nordbanken/Postgirot, paragraph 37.
                                                20

112. The market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration did
     not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the previous findings of
     the Commission as regards the geographic scope of the provision of card payment
     services.
113. Therefore, in line with its past decisions, the Commission considers for the purpose of
     the present decision that the geographic scope of the markets for the provision of card
     payment services is likely to be national.
7.   Provision of web hosting services
7.1  Product market definition
     The Notifying Parties' view
114. According to the Notifying Parties, Belgacom will provide the BmWallet JV with web
     hosting services in the form of the supply of managed services and support
     infrastructure, including "front-end" and "back-office" applications hosted on
     Belgacom's hosting services platforms.
115. The Notifying Parties state that the general web-hosting sector can be subdivided into
     four sub-segments. In particular, the Notifying Parties take the view that there are
     distinct markets for (i) the supply of basic co-location services such as connectivity,
     power, and the facilities, (ii) the supply of shared and dedicated hosting consisting of
     hosting a customer's web-site on the web host's servers and providing the necessary
     support applications, (iii) the supply of managed services to outsource complex
     enterprise applications and support infrastructure, including "front-end" and "back-
     office" applications hosted on the providers' platforms (so-called ASP) and (iv) the
     supply of content delivery services (CDS) such as Streaming Content Delivery
     Services and Static Content Delivery Products.
116. As regards to the supply of shared and dedicated web hosting, the Notifying Parties
     submit that the market generally distinguishes between shared and dedicated web
     hosting services. The latter type covers tailored services essentially for major
     corporate clients, whereas shared web hosting services offer packages to a broad client
     base. Dedicated web hosting services represent a smaller volume of sales as opposed
     to shared web hosting services.
     The Commission's assessment
117. The Commission has analysed the market for web-hosting services in its decisions
     MCI-WorldCom/Sprint and Kpnqwest/Ebone/Gts.41
118. In MCI-WorldCom/Sprint, the Commission defined web hosting services as
     essentially providing Internet space for websites in data centres. In that decision, a
     web hosting provider was held to offer "web hosting centres (or data centres)
40   See Commission decision of 29 September 2006 in Case No COMP/M.4316 – Atos
     Origin/Banksys/BCC, paragraph 30; Commission decision of 2 June 2005 in Case No M.3740 –
     Barclays Bank/Foreningssparbanken/JV, paragraph 16; Commission decision of 8 November 2001 in
     Case No COMP/M.2567 – Nordbanken/Postgirot, paragraph 37.
41   See Commission decision of 28 June 2000 in Case No COMP/M.1741 MCI-WorldCom/Sprint,
     paragraph 32 and 33; Commission decision of 16 January 2002 in Case No COMP/M.2648 –
     KPNQWEST/EBONE/GTS, paragraph 19 and 20.
                                               21

     featuring access-controlled buildings with servers that are monitored from a central,
     webhosting operations centre. The data centres are specially built to house Internet
     servers and equipment. Customers of the data centres connect to the data centre and
     the webhost then ensures the connection to the Internet through its own servers that
     are directly connected to the Internet backbones".
119. In Kpnqwest/Ebone/Gts, the Commission noted that the results of the market
     investigation broadly confirmed the views of the Notifying Parties stated above in
     paragraphs 115 and 116. However, the Commission ultimately left open the exact
     product market definition since no competition concerns arose irrespective of the
     market definition used.
120. The market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration did
     not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the previous findings of
     the Commission as regards the definition of the web hosting services market(s).
121. In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact delineation of the
     relevant product market(s) for web hosting services can be left open since the
     proposed concentration does not raise competition concerns under any possible market
     definition.
7.2  Geographic market definition
     The Notifying Parties' view
122. The Notifying Parties submit that there are no physical boundaries to offer or purchase
     web hosting services and the relevant geographical market is most probably wider
     than national. However, for the purpose of the present case, they provide data on the
     narrowest possible geographical market, that is to say the Belgian market for web
     hosting services.
     The Commission's assessment
123. In Kpnqwest/Ebone/Gts, the Commission noted that the market investigation
     suggested that the market for web hosting services was national, but ultimately left
     open the geographic market definition, since the proposed concentration did not raise
     competition concerns under any possible market definition.
124. The market investigation conducted for the purpose of the present concentration did
     not provide any element that would substantiate a change to the previous findings of
     the Commission as regards the geographic scope of the web hosting services
     market(s).
125. In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact delineation of the
     relevant geographic market(s) for web hosting services can also be left open since the
     proposed concentration does not raise competition concerns under any possible market
     definition.
126. As Belgacom has a modest market share on the web hosting market in general in
     Belgium ([0-5]%) and its market share in Belgium is less than 5% irrespective of any
     further market definition (that is to say on a shared and dedicated web hosting market,
     shared web hosting market only, or dedicated web hosting market only), the proposed
     concentration will therefore not lead to any affected markets in relation to the vertical
                                              22

     link between Belgacom's activities for the provision of web hosting services in
     Belgium and the BmWallet activities.
127. As a result, this market is not affected by the transaction and will, as a result, not be
     further discussed in the present decision.
V.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
1.   Background information
128. The operation takes place in the new but fast growing mobile commerce
     (MCommerce) sector, which encompasses retail mobile payments, mobile advertising,
     data analytics and ticket storage services.
1.1 The rise of smartphones and tablets
129. The development of MCommerce has been made possible by the rapid market
     penetration of smartphones and tablets (such as Apple's iPhone and iPad, handsets and
     tablets supporting Google's Android mobile OS, Research in Motion's Blackberry, and
     Nokia's mobile handsets supporting Microsoft's Windows Phone platform) in
     Belgium, and the consequent supply of new services for mobile handsets and tablets.
130. The functionalities available through mobile handsets and tablets have been gradually
     increasing for many years. However, they have increased exponentially since the
     introduction of smartphones, with consumers increasingly expecting their mobile
     handsets to perform more functions.
131. Smartphones and tablets can be differentiated from traditional mobile phones because
     they are operated through an advanced OS (such as Apple iOS or Google Android)
     that enables various features that are similar to PCs, including easier internet
     connectivity by enabling the use of open browsers that are similar to those used on
     PCs and not restricted to the websites they can browse, the ability to download and
     install a very wide variety of Apps, multiple communication options including emails,
     internet protocol ("IP") based notifications through Apps ("IP-based push
     notifications"), greater processing power, and larger screens. These attributes enable
     consumers to use their mobile phones and tablets for a variety of tasks that could
     previously only be performed on static PCs in an even more convenient manner
     because most consumers carry their smartphone with them at all times and, because
     the device is always powered on, it makes it much simpler to use for everyday tasks
     such as checking emails than using a PC (which requires booting up, etc.). This also
     includes carrying out functions that, until recently, would have been seen as involving
     information too sensitive to be sent by or kept on a mobile handset.42
1.2  Mobile transactions
132. Accompanying the rise of smartphones has been the growth of mobile transactions:
     allowing consumers to carry out financial and other transactions using their mobile
     handsets online via the Internet.
42   For instance, an increasing number of airlines offer the option of a "mobile ticket", sent to the
     consumer's mobile handset and used, without printing, to access airports and board flights.
                                                  23

133. A number of Internet companies (or over the top ("OTT") players - companies with no
     traditional mobile networking capability but with the ability to provide services using
     data connectivity over mobile handsets) and financial services entities have announced
     plans to become active in providing mobile payment wallets worldwide, such as
     Google with its Google Wallet and Apple.
134. In addition, PayPal currently provides a mobile payment wallet in Belgium through an
     App that is available to consumers through App stores.
135. Furthermore, two wholesale mobile wallet platforms are planned to be launched
     imminently in Belgium:
     i.      Visa announced in April 2012 the launch of V.me, a wholesale mobile platform
             (otherwise called a white label mobile wallet) available to its members.43 The
             V.me wallet will be tailored by banks which choose to take it up and offer it to
             their customers. It will allow customers in Belgium to store one or more of their
             payment cards on a V.me account.
     ii.     MasterCard is also launching its MasterPass mobile wallet platform.44 Similar to
             V.me, MasterPass is a wholesale mobile wallet platform (white label wallet).
             MasterPass provides the underlying technology and platform and makes it
             available as a wholesale platform to parties who are interested to offer it, such
             as banks.
136. Any members of Master Card and Visa (such as banks) that are interested in adopting
     the MasterPass or V.me platforms (also known as "the Wallet Partners") can
     customise the payment wallets and offer them to their own customers. Both the
     MasterPass and V.me platforms are designed by MasterCard and Visa respectively as
     open platforms and technically accept all types of payment cards, such as Visa,
     Mastercard, American Express and Bancontact / Mistercash, whether credit, debit or
     prepaid. However, it is for each retail issuer of a MasterPass or V.me wallet (for each
     bank) to decide which cards their own retail payment wallet will accept. When ready
     to pay at a merchant website, Consumers will be able to access the card they want to
     use by entering their V.me or MasterPass email address and password during the
     checkout process, rather than their credit card details.
137. In the context of the BmWallet JV, banks will be Service Providers, acting as issuers
     of the MasterPass wallet (and later of the V.me wallet) on a retail basis. BNP Paribas
     Fortis has indicated that it intends to offer a retail payment wallet using the
     MasterPass platform. The Notifying Parties have also indicated that each bank that
     subscribes to the MasterPass wallet services will operate its own customised retail
     wallet.
43   See https://www.ve.me/ and http://www.zdnet.com/blog/london/visa-to-launch-vme-digital-wallet-by-
     late-2012/4470.
44   https://paypass.com/tap_and_go/index.html.
                                                24

1.3  The Secure Element (SE)
138. The SE is a piece of hardware and software capable of securely hosting Apps and their
     confidential and cryptographic data.45
139. There are several possible locations for an SE in the case of a payment transaction
     performed via a mobile handset:
     i.       On the Subscriber Identification Module ("SIM") card;46
     ii.      On a (micro)Secure Digital ("SD") card which can be integrated in some mobile
              handsets;
     iii.     On an external device such a Universal Serial Bus ("USB") key;
     iv.      In the chip which is embedded in the mobile handset's hardware ("embedded
              SE");
     v.       In the cloud, that is to say saved on a remote server.
140. The SE is provided by an issuer. The SE issuer is a trusted party responsible for the
     issuance and maintenance of an SE. Typically it will be the MNO for SIM-based SEs,
     the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) or OS provider for embedded SEs, and
     the SE supplier for external SEs. The issuer has control over access to the SE.
141. SIM based SEs, microSD and USB SEs (or "external SEs”) and embedded SEs are
     placed on hardware which renders them secure. On the other hand, cloud based SEs
     are software based, and information needs to travel from the server (where the secure
     information is stored) to the user's handset, which renders them less secure. Therefore,
     cloud-based SEs are considered by some market participants as being less reliable
     than hardware based solutions.
142. The use of an SE for a mobile wallet is related to the level of security requested for a
     particular service. This aspect is particularly sensitive when it is necessary to store the
     consumer payment credentials.
143. Thus, SEs are an essential element for mobile wallets which use proximity (NFC)
     payments, such as the MCommerce wallet in the UK. However, they are not essential
     for online transactions such as the ones that will be done via the BmWallet because of
     the difference in the technical characteristics of the two types of payments.47 Online
45   http://www.globalplatform.org/mediaguideSE.asp. GlobalPlatform is a cross industry, non-profit
     association which identifies, develops and publishes specifications that promote the secure and
     interoperable deployment and management of multiple applications on secure chip technology.
46   A Universal Integrated Circuit Card ("UICC") is used in the mobile communications industry, as
     defined in ETSI TS 102 221. UICC is a new generation SIM card included in mobile phones or laptops
     used in some high speed wireless 3G networks. The UICC can store contacts and enables a secure and
     reliable voice and multi-media data connection, global roaming and remotely adds new Apps and
     services. Smaller in size than a full card, it contains a computer, or microprocessor, its own data storage
     and software. It is an evolution of the SIM used to identify subscribers in GSM networks. As UICC is
     still often referred to as a SIM card in the industry, the term SIM card will be used throughout the
     present decision for ease of reference.
47   Agreed minutes of telephone conference call of 26 September 2013 with a mobile wallet provider.
                                                       25

     wallets may use other security methods which do not require an SE, such as software,
     or cloud based solutions using usernames and passwords, verification systems (such as
     the Visa verification) and dongle authentication.
144. Currently, the Commission understands that online payment wallets do not use SEs. The
     BmWallet JV during a first phase will rely on software-based security for the processing
     of in-app purchases, and one respondent to the market investigation stated that it is not
     aware of any online only (that is to say non-NFC) wallets which rely on a SE.48
2.   Preliminary Remarks
2.1  Horizontal assessment
145. In the present case, the proposed concentration gives rise to limited horizontal
     overlaps:
     i.     in the market(s) for retail distribution of mobile wallet services in which the
            BmWallet JV and the Notifying Parties, that is to say Belgacom and BNP
            Paribas Fortis, will be present; and
     ii.    in the market(s) for digital advertising services in which both the BmWallet JV
            and Belgacom will be present.
2.2  Non-horizontal assessment
146. According to the Guidelines on the assessment of non-horizontal mergers,49 a vertical
     merger is said to result in foreclosure where actual or potential rivals' access to supplies
     or markets is hampered or eliminated as a result of the merger, thereby reducing these
     companies' ability and incentive to compete. Such foreclosure is regarded as
     anticompetitive where, as a result of the merger, the merging companies and possibly
     also some of its competitors are able to profitably increase the price charged to
     consumers.50
147. In relation to conglomerate mergers, whereas it is acknowledged that in the majority of
     circumstances they will not lead to any competition problems, in certain cases there may
     be harm to competition.51 The main concern in the context of conglomerate mergers is
     that of foreclosure. The combination of products in related markets may confer on the
     merged entity the ability and incentive to leverage a strong market position from one
     market to another by means of tying or bundling or other exclusionary practices.52
148. In assessing the likelihood of foreclosure, the Commission examines, first, whether the
     merged firm would have the ability to foreclose its rivals, second, whether it would have
     the economic incentive to do so and, third, whether a foreclosure strategy would have a
     significant detrimental effect on competition, thus causing harm to consumers.53
48   Agreed minutes of telephone conference call of 26 September 2013 with a mobile wallet provider.
49   See Guidelines on the assessment of non-horizontal mergers under the Council regulation on the control
     of concentrations between undertakings, (2008/C 265/07) (the "Non-Horizontal Merger Guidelines").
50   See Non-Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 29.
51   See Non-Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 92.
52   See Non-Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 93.
53   See Non-Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 94.
                                                  26

149. When assessing the likelihood of such an anticompetitive foreclosure scenario, it must
     be examined "first, whether the merged entity would have, post-merger, the ability to
     substantially foreclose access to inputs, second, whether it would have the incentive to
     do so, and third, whether a foreclosure strategy would have a significant detrimental
     effect in the competition downstream".54
150. In the present case, the proposed concentration gives rise to certain non-horizontal links.
     The Notifying Parties are active in markets that are vertically-related or neighbouring to
     the market for the retail distribution of mobile wallet services in Belgium, in which the
     BmWallet JV will be active. In relation to any non-horizontal effects, the Commission
     examined:
     i.     the vertical or conglomerate links with the retail mobile telephony services of
            Belgacom; and
     ii.    the vertical links with the provision of retail banking services and in particular the
            markets for the provision of card payment services by BNP Paribas Fortis.
151. The provision of retail mobile telephony services constitutes a complementary,
     neighbouring market to the retail provision of mobile wallet services or a vertical
     market in the case when the mobile wallets require access to the SIM-based SE.
152. Similarly, the markets for the provision of card payment services constitute a vertical
     input in the BmWallet.
3.   Horizontal Assessment
3.1  Retail distribution of mobile wallet services
153. The BmWallet JV will be a new entrant in the nascent and quickly-evolving market
     for the retail distribution of mobile wallet services in Belgium. Both Notifying Parties
     currently have limited activities in the retail distribution of mobile wallet services in
     Belgium.
154. BNP Paribas Fortis distributes its mobile payment applications for smartphones and
     tablets under the "Easy Banking" commercial name. These Android and IOs Apps
     propose the typical services offered by retail banking Apps (balance, transfer, account
     history, card history) as well as a simple P2P (Peer to Peer) credit transfer optimised
     for smartphones ("Easy Transfer"). Easy Transfer allows users to execute a transfer
     between two Belgian mobile phone numbers that are each linked to a current account
     number. A total of […] people have downloaded the different versions of the Easy
     Banking App. Easy Banking can only be used by BNP Paribas Fortis customers and is
     the only App that has access to mobile banking services for BNP Paribas Fortis
     customers.
155. Belgacom, through its subsidiary Mobile-for has launched Ping Ping, a mobile micro-
     payment platform in Belgium which enables users to pay for small daily expenses up
     to a limit of EUR 25 per transaction relying on a pre-paid account. Ping Ping is a free-
     standing tag allowing users to make purchases from approved merchants / vending
     machines using NFC. Unlike the BmWallet, Ping Ping is prepaid only, not directly
     linked to any mobile wallet or online bank account, limited to proximity payments
54   See Non-Horizontal Merger Guidelines, paragraph 32.
                                                 27

     only, does not always need a mobile phone (in the case of paying for parking meter or
     bus ticket with an SMS) to function and only available to closed user-groups for
     purchases, for example, in offices, bars, canteens as well as from vending machines.
     The Notifying Parties' view
156. In relation to Easy Banking and Easy Transfer, the Notifying Parties argue that these
     are mobile banking applications and not mobile payment wallets. The Notifying
     Parties also argue that there is currently no relation between the mobile banking Apps
     and the BmWallet JV. For the sake of completeness, in the future, the Notifying
     Parties also note that BNP Paribas Fortis could decide to authenticate access to its
     mobile banking Apps via the BmWallet PIN. The bank would become a customer
     (Service User) of the mobile authentication service offered by the BmWallet JV.
157. In relation to the Belgacom mobile payment service Ping Ping, according to the
     Notifying Parties, Ping Ping competes with other pre-paid card payment services but
     not with mobile wallet services.55
158. The Notifying Parties consider that mobile wallets are in a take-off phase and their
     activities generally concern nascent but rapidly expanding markets. They argue that it
     is hard at this stage to foresee how demand will be structured. Based on publicly
     available information, a variety of mobile payment solutions currently exist or are
     under development in the world. Overall, the worldwide mobile payments context is
     extremely competitive and characterised by a race between companies, joint ventures
     and start up projects, each of which aims to become a successful model. In that
     context, whilst it may be anticipated that the solutions developed will in many cases
     present common features, developers will in all likelihood, as in any other market,
     develop specific options and possibilities that may render their solutions more
     appealing to potential customers.
159. The Notifying Parties argue that switching costs are expected to be minimal and
     should not constitute an obstacle to end users or merchants moving from one platform
     to another. The concentration of demand is minimal as these solutions will be offered
     to individual end users and merchants. No specific exclusive distribution contracts are
     planned either.
     The Commission's assessment
160. The Commission considers that post-transaction the BmWallet JV will face
     competition from a number of well-established players.
161. As concerns actual competitors, Ogone, a Belgian payment service provider,
     launched in August 2013 a smartphone App enabling iPhone users to purchase tickets
     on Belgian Railways (NMBS/SNCB). Moreover, PayPal has already launched a
     mobile App on the Belgian market. In addition, Google has launched Google Wallet
     which is available in Belgium as a web-based electronic money account that is created
     by the user and is funded by payment instruments (such as credit cards).56 Google
55   See Notifying Parties' response to the Commission's Request for Information of 19 September 2013,
     question 1.
56   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing wallet providers of 6 September, question 10.
                                                 28

     Wallet is the branded name for the payment service used for Google Play and InApp
     transactions in Belgium.
162. There are also a number of players that are about to launch operations in Belgium.
     Currently MasterCard is launching its wholesale MasterPass payment wallet platform
     in Belgium. Visa is also launching in Belgium "V.me", a white labelled service which
     will be offered as a wholesale platform to Visa Europe's members. The market
     investigation has shown that these wholesale initiatives may lead to new entry on the
     retail level.
163. The market investigation respondents have indicated that a number of banks and
     M(V)NOs in Belgium are either already actively planning the launch of a mobile
     wallet service, either using these wholesale platforms or independently. Others are at
     an earlier stage and are still contemplating and researching the commercial and
     technical elements for such launch.57 Finally, a number of multinational players such
     as Google currently offer mobile wallets in other countries and may choose to enter
     the Belgian market in the near future.
164. Respondents to the market investigation have confirmed that in the future, there will
     be a multitude of mobile wallets: "Wallet services can be offered by many parties
     located in Belgium as the distribution of such services can be made relatively easy." It
     is expected that consumers will have the choice between merchants mobile wallets,
     banks mobile wallets, payment companies mobile wallets (using the Visa, the
     MasterCard wholesale wallet platforms or PayPal), M(V)NO wallets, the JV's mobile
     wallet and potentially other wallets coming on to the market. Visa Europe offers on a
     wholesale basis the V.me wallet platform service to all its members who in turn would
     offer it to their merchants and consumers. Similarly, the MasterPass platform is made
     available on a wholesale basis to parties interested to leverage it.58
165. One mobile wallet provider respondent to the market investigation considers that "on
     the assumption that the JV's mobile wallet is an open ecosystem, [the BmWallet JV]
     should not prevent [a card scheme] from working with its members for the
     development and launch of [competing wallets] in Belgium, nor should it prevent
     [competing wallets] from being part of the JV's mobile wallet if a [payment wallet
     provider] so wished." Another respondent explained that "wallet services can be
     offered by many parties located in Belgium (other telecom operators, financial
     institutions, retailers, e-commerce service providers…) as the distribution of such
     services can be made relatively easily. In addition Belgian consumers can be offered
     wallet services by international players as well (e.g. Google, Paypal, etc)."59
166. However, a few respondents expressed concerns about the market strength and
     resources of the Notifying Parties in their respective upstream markets for mobile
57   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     questions 10 to 11, 20 and 20.1; to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September 2013,
     questions 14, 20 and 20.1; to Questionnaire Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6 September
     2013, questions 10 to 11, 14, 20, 23 and 23.1; and to Questionnaire Q4 to suppliers of 6 September
     2013, questions 17 and 17.1.
58   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     questions 14, 15, 18, 18.1, 19 and 19.1; and to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September
     2013, questions 16 and 16.1.
59   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     question 20.
                                                    29

     telephony services and banking. One supplier respondent to the market investigation60
     commented that "it would be hard to match the distribution network of these two
     incumbents". Similarly, three competing M(V)NOs expressed their concerns that the
     Proposed Transaction concerns two very large players in the market, making it
     impossible for an M(V)NO to compete, even in a JV with a bank. Another competing
     M(V)NO stated that "as BNP and Belgacom are (national) market leaders in their
     sector in Belgium, it will be difficult to enter in a later stage the market and
     compete".61 Finally, a competing financial institution expressed its concern that in
     Belgium there is no credible alternative next to Belgacom in terms of network
     coverage for the set-up of a mobile wallet having the same functionalities and scale as
     the BmWallet JV's mobile wallet.62
167. The Commission considered these statements and the position of the Notifying Parties
     in the upstream markets for the provision of retail telephony services and banking
     services. Despite the strength of the Notifying Parties and their extensive distribution
     network, the Commission considers that there are other market players that will be in
     a position to enter the market, both on the basis of similar national distribution
     networks (such as other Belgian MNOs or Belgian banks) or on the basis of similar
     initiatives in Europe.
168. On this basis, if the market is the market for the retail distribution of mobile wallet
     services in Belgium, the Commission considers that the proposed concentration will
     not remove an important competitor by creating the BmWallet JV, and that a number
     of alternatives will remain available to customers post-transaction. As a result, the
     Commission concludes that it is not likely that the proposed concentration will
     significantly impede effective competition in the market for the retail distribution of
     mobile wallet services in Belgium, irrespective of the exact market definition.
169. Moreover, if the product market is wider and includes not only mobile wallet services
     but also existing offline payments (such as credit and debit card transactions in
     proximity payments or online), then the Commission considers that the proposed
     concentration will not significantly impede effective competition in this wider market
     for payments, as the BmWallet JV is a new entrant and does not have any share of the
     market at the moment. In addition, the BmWallet JV will compete in that wider
     market with a number of established and active players, such as the financial
     institutions and payment providers in Belgium.
3.2  Digital advertising services
170. The BmWallet JV will be a new entrant in the Belgian market for digital advertising
     services and its sub-segments. The BmWallet JV will sell digital advertising
     inventory. The BmWallet JV could be active on the possible market for the
     distribution of mobile coupons, thus connecting consumers to advertisers and other
     merchants (the Service Users) on one hand, and to couponing companies (the Service
     Providers) on the other hand.
60   See Responses to Questionnaire Q4 to suppliers of 6 September 2013, question 14.
61   See Responses to Questionnaire Q2 to competing M(V)NOs of 6 September 2013, questions 14, 21 and
     22.
62   See Responses to Questionnaire Q3 to competing financial institutions of 6 September 2013, question
     14.
                                                  30

171. As was mentioned in paragraph 59, the types of advertising services to be offered by
     the BmWallet JV will include (i) push coupon offers: opt-in offers distributed to
     Consumers based on their prior consent to receive such offers, and (ii) pull coupon
     offers: offers made through a "coupon wall", a location where consumers would be
     encouraged to visit and "pull" out the offers they want to add to their wallets for future
     use. The coupon offers will include both open coupons (that is to say coupons that can
     be redeemed in any store, for example a Coca Cola coupon) and closed coupons (that
     is to say coupons that can be redeemed only for services offered directly by the
     Service User issuing the coupon). All coupons will be stored in the BmWallet if the
     Service User so chooses by "activating" them. Service Users whose coupons are being
     distributed (for example Coca Cola, Quick, etc.) will be charged per coupon on the
     basis of an incremental success fee.
172. Belgacom offers limited digital advertising services. In particular, it offers advertising
     inventory as online display formats and banners on its mobile website m.skynet.be and
     advertising messaging sold by aggregators. Belgacom also sends targeted messaging
     to Belgacom users, but only in relation to offers relating to Belgacom services.
     The Notifying Parties' views
173. The Notifying Parties note that in Belgium, on the basis of the advertising rankings,
     otherwise called "saleshouse ratecards", Belgacom's m.skynet.be site ranks sixth,
     behind the mobile websites of Netlog, HLN.be, Standaard.be, Sporza, Nieuwsblad.be /
     Lavenir.net.
     The Commission's assessment
174. On the narrowest potential market on which the BmWallet JV will be active, that is to
     say the market for the provision of intermediation services for mobile advertising
     messaging (through push and pull messages) in Belgium, there would be no horizontal
     overlap with the Notifying Parties, since neither BNP Paribas Fortis, nor Belgacom
     are currently active in this market.
175. On the wider market for mobile advertising services in Belgium, there is a limited
     overlap between the BmWallet JV and Belgacom. However, the Notifying Parties
     estimate that Belgacom represents maximum [0-5]% of the Belgian market for mobile
     advertising. Furthermore, the BmWallet JV would face strong global competitors,
     such as Yahoo!, which is active in Belgium, or others such as Google, which controls
     around 80% of the mobile advertising market globally, or others such as Millenial
     Media, InMobi, Madvertise, Amobee and Smaato which operate on a worldwide
     basis.
176. On this basis, the Commission considers that the proposed transaction is not likely to
     significantly impede effective competition in the market for digital (online and
     mobile) advertising services in Belgium irrespective of the exact market definition.
4.   Non-Horizontal Assessment
4.1  Vertical and conglomerate links with retail mobile telephony services.
177. Belgacom is active in the provision of retail mobile telephony services in Belgium,
     and the BmWallet JV will be active in the market for the retail distribution of mobile
     wallet services. In order to access the mobile wallet, users need to connect via a
     mobile Internet connection (3G) or via a fixed broadband Internet connection through
                                             31

     Wi-Fi. Hence, there is a conglomerate relationship between the retail mobile
     telephony services of Belgacom on one hand and the retail distribution of mobile
     wallet services by the BmWallet JV on the other hand.
178. In addition, if a mobile wallet relies on a SIM-based SE, then access to the SIM card
     can be an input for the functioning of the mobile wallet. This is particularly true for
     mobile wallets with NFC functionality, as they require some type of SE. This
     relationship creates a potential vertical link between the mobile telephony services of
     Belgacom on one hand, and the retail distribution of mobile wallet services of the
     BmWallet JV on the other hand.
179. In Belgium, the M(V)NOs provide and own the SIM cards which are inserted into
     their customers' mobile handsets. Accordingly, the M(V)NO as issuer has content
     management rights, that is to say rights which allow the holder to load the initial keys
     governing access, their application code, confidential data for personalisation, or to
     update data or code.
180. The Commission has examined the following two foreclosure theories:
     i.     Whether Belgacom, through its presence in the retail market for mobile
            telephony services in Belgium would have the ability and incentive to foreclose
            competing mobile wallets from operating on its network (by either impeding the
            download of competing mobile wallet Apps on a mobile phone, or by refusing
            access to Belgacom's SIM cards for competing mobile wallets which require
            access to SIM cards for their security solutions) and whether such foreclosure
            strategy would have a significant detrimental effect on competition in the
            market for the retail distribution of mobile wallets; and
     ii.    Whether the BmWallet JV would have the ability and incentive to foreclose
            other M(V)NO networks in Belgium from offering the BmWallet to their
            customers and whether such foreclosure strategy would have a significant
            detrimental effect on competition in the retail market for mobile telephony
            services in Belgium.
     Risk of foreclosure of competing mobile wallets from Belgacom's network
     The Notifying Parties' view
181. The Notifying Parties state that there are several other significant financial institutions
     and / or M(V)NOs active on the Belgian market that would have the financial
     resources and the technical capabilities to develop a mobile wallet similar to the
     BmWallet. These players are free to develop such competing platforms (themselves,
     or through third party developers), and the BmWallet JV could not constitute a
     technical or commercial obstacle to their development (beyond the competitive
     constraint that the presence of a competitor always represents for any potential new
     entrant on any market).
182. According to the Notifying Parties, Belgacom will not have the technical ability to
     impede the download of competing mobile wallet Apps on a mobile phone (whether
     or not the BmWallet has already been downloaded on that mobile phone). After the
     download, Belgacom would not have the technical ability to prevent its customers
     from relying on the Belgacom network to use these competing mobile wallets.
                                               32

183. The Notifying Parties note, however, that in the future SIM-based SE environment,
     mobile operators will need to define a business process to allow third parties to use the
     SE on the SIM card. In practice, they need to reserve some memory space (the secure
     domain) on the SIM card for an external party to use and provide a technical interface
     for the external party to securely access this space.
184. In this regard, the memory of a SIM card is limited and additional access to the
     Trusted Service Manager Platform ("TSM") is needed. However, since the investment
     for enabling the secure domains is significant, Belgacom will have an incentive to sell
     this service to third parties. Moreover, the number of interested parties for these
     security domains is expected to be very limited.
185. In any event, the Notifying Parties submit that in view of the fierce competition on the
     Belgian market for retail mobile telephony services, Belgacom would not have any
     incentive, from a commercial point of view, to impede other potential competing
     mobile wallets from being accessible through the Belgacom network, as this may
     weaken its competitive positions vis-à-vis these other players.
     The Commission's assessment
186. As regards the ability to foreclose competing mobile wallets, the Commission
     examined firstly whether Belgacom would have the ability to foreclose competing
     wallets by blocking the downloading, functioning and updating of a competing mobile
     wallet.
187. To make a payment with their mobile handsets, consumers would have to either use a
     mobile wallet App which is pre-installed by OEMs on the mobile handset, or
     download an App from an App store (such as Google Play or iTunes).
188. The Commission concluded in the MCommerce decision that MNOs cannot
     technically prevent mobile wallets to be based and / or installed by a third party. It is
     not possible for MNOs to prevent the downloading of a competing mobile wallet App
     without blocking access to the entire App store. Furthermore, it is not possible to stop
     a consumer using their 3G or Wi-Fi connection to download Apps from App stores
     such as Google Play or iTunes. Similarly, access to a mobile broadband connection
     can be used to initially activate an embedded SE but alternatively, this activation can
     also be done with USB or a Wi-Fi connection. The same holds true for software
     upgrades and services. Finally, it is not possible to block or degrade the service
     offered by competing wallets over the mobile network of Belgacom.
189. These past findings were confirmed by the results of the market investigation in the
     present case. As one mobile wallet provider confirmed, "the BmWallet application
     would be downloaded from the Apple store or the Android store; and as per the iOS
     or Android specifications, applications should function seamlessly and
     independently".63
190. Therefore, in line with its finding in the MCommerce decision, the Commission
     concludes that there is no ability by Belgacom to restrict a competing mobile wallet
63   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     question 21.
                                              33

     from being downloaded, updated or from functioning, irrespective of the MNO
     network.64
191. Secondly, the Commission examined whether Belgacom would have the ability to
     foreclose competing mobile wallets by refusing to grant them access to the SIM-based
     SE of Belgacom's SIM cards.
192. As discussed in paragraph 139 above, there are a number of possibilities to place the
     SE: (i) in the SIM card (SIM-based SEs); (ii) as an external chip, such as MicroSDs,
     USBs or stickers with a microchip (external SEs); (iii) embedded on a mobile handset
     (embedded SEs) or (iv) stored remotely on the cloud (cloud-based SEs).
193. If the SE of a mobile wallet is placed on an external hardware (such as a MicroSD) or
     is embedded on a mobile handset or is stored on the cloud, then the mobile wallet is
     not dependent on any specific network or M(V)NO. If, on the other hand, the SE is
     placed on the SIM card, then access to the SIM will need to be authorised by the
     M(V)NO for each network.
194. The Commission notes that access to an SE by competing mobile wallet providers is
     not an essential input if the mobile wallet has only online functions and does not use
     NFC technology for proximity payments.65 Mobile wallet transactions can use
     security solutions which are cloud or software based, such as a username and
     password security, verification systems and dongle authentication.
195. In particular, one respondent who is launching a competing mobile wallet informed
     the Commission that its planned wallet would function without any SE, on the basis of
     other security systems. An M(V)NO commented that it is also considering launching a
     competing mobile wallet which would rely on a cloud based security. Finally, one
     respondent to the Commission's investigation informed the Commission that it is not
     aware of any online-only mobile wallets which use an SE.66
196. For competing mobile wallets that use NFC technology for proximity payments,
     access to some type of SE is essential.
197. SIM-based SEs are one type of SE. If competitors can access other types of SEs, then
     there is no risk of foreclosure on the basis of refusal of access to the SIM-based SEs of
     Belgacom.
198. The other types of SEs are the following:
        i. Embedded SEs: The most likely alternative to the SIM-based SE would be the
             embedded SE. Several OEMs already have, or are starting to release new
             smartphones with dual SE architecture (including one SE directly embedded in
             the mobile handset and one SE which would be inside the SIM card). The
64   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     questions 21 to 21.7; to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September 2013, questions 22 to
     22.7; to Questionnaire Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6 September 2013, questions 24 to
     24.7; and to Questionnaire Q4 to suppliers of 6 September 2013, questions 21 to 21.7.
65   Agreed minutes of telephone conference call of 26 September 2013 with a mobile wallet provider.
66   Response from a card scheme to additional questions from the Commission of 23 September 2013,
     page 1, question 1 a).
                                                    34

             availability of dual architecture smartphones opens the way for competitors to
             offer their products to consumers using embedded SE.67
        ii. External SEs: Although external SEs may appeal less to some consumers
             wishing to have ultimate security in their payments, they are nonetheless
             alternatives that are available to other consumers. For external SEs using a
             MicroSD card, their take-up will depend on the availability of MicroSD slots on
             mobile handsets and the seamless functioning of MicroSD hardware in terms of
             securing a mobile handset's radio performance. Others such as stickers with a
             microchip attached to the back of mobile handset will not have such card slot
             availability issue.68
        iii. Cloud based SEs:69 Cloud based SEs are SEs where the payment credentials are
             stored in the cloud, that is to say stored remotely on a server. Although cloud
             based SEs are considered by some banks to be less secure or too slow and may
             hence appeal less to consumers wishing ultimate security, they are nonetheless
             available to store payment credentials.70
199. On this basis, the Commission notes first that online wallets can function without an
     SE, although a number of mobile wallets might want to have NFC functionality in the
     future and second, that there are alternative SEs to the SIM-based SE for NFC wallets.
200. A foreclosure of access to the SIM would affect the customer base of Belgacom,
     which represents approximately [30-40]% of Belgian subscribers to retail mobile
     telephony services. All non-Belgacom customers would not be affected by any
     decision of Belgacom to restrict access of competing mobile wallets to the Belgacom
     SIM card.
201. Therefore, based on the above, the Commission considers that while Belgacom seems
     to have the ability to refuse competing mobile wallets access to its SIM cards such
     strategy could be circumvented, even by its own subscribers who could use competing
     mobile wallets not using a SIM-based SE, and would only have a limited effect in
     relation to the operation of competing mobile wallets. As a result, Belgacom's ability
     to potentially refuse access to its SIM for the placement of the SE would not give it
     the ability to foreclose competing mobile wallets from operating on the Belgian
     market for retail mobile wallet services.
202. The Commission nonetheless also investigated the incentive of the BmWallet JV to
     restrict Belgacom customers' access to competing mobile wallets, and concludes that
67   For instance, Visa will preload its PayWave mobile payments applet onto embedded secure elements on
     some of Samsung's devices such as the Galaxy S4
     (http://pressreleases.visa.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=215693&p=irol-newsarticlePR&ID=1788782).
68   For instance, drivers in Metz, France can now register online to get an NFC sticker that they attach to
     the back of their phone to pay for their stay at a 2,100 place underground car park without a ticket or
     cash.
69   Cloud based SEs should not be confused with cloud based security solutions. A cloud based SE is
     software capable of securely hosting Apps and their confidential and cryptographic data. Cloud based
     security solutions are other security systems on the cloud, such as a username / password system, a
     verification system or a dongle authentication system.
70   For instance, the Dutch software company BellID, a provider of lifecycle management solutions for
     tokens (smart cards, mobile NFC phones) and smartcards, has launched an SE in the Cloud software
     that enables mobile NFC transactions to be made by storing and accessing NFC credentials in a remote
     environment rather than on the mobile device. This gives application issuers independence and direct
     control to manage their credentials without any third party involvement.
                                                     35

     it is not likely that it would have such incentive. The Commission considers that
     restricting access to alternative mobile wallets could have a counter-effect in relation
     to Belgacom's retail mobile telephony services. If a customer of Belgacom is refused
     access to a successful competing mobile wallet which is available on the Mobistar or
     BASE networks in Belgium, he / she may switch away from Belgacom to another
     MNO.
203. This finding was supported by respondents to the market investigation, which
     confirmed that the availability of a multitude and variety of mobile wallets may
     become a key differentiating factor in the future for retail mobile telephony operators.
     Furthermore, a number of respondents explained that in the nascent mobile wallet
     market, customers want to use and test any mobile wallet and the incentive is to allow
     open access to all of them, so that the uptake towards mobile wallets is higher. One
     mobile wallet provider commented that "today most consumers who regularly shop
     online already use several digital wallets (e.g. iTunestore, Amazon "one click"
     payments, Paypal etc). Tomorrow, we expect that consumers will use even more
     digital wallets, depending on their needs and habits." Another competitor argued that
     "digital wallets are in their infancy and it is not possible to fully predict consumer
     behaviour as the market develops. Consumers are likely to have more than one
     digital wallet. For example, a consumer may have a relationship with an MNO which
     offers a digital wallet, as well as a relationship with a bank which also offers digital
     wallet with distinct (online banking) functionalities."71
204. Therefore, the Commission considers that the Notifying Parties would not have the
     incentive to foreclose access to competing mobile wallets.
205. In the event that such foreclosure strategy were to be adopted, it would furthermore
     not have any significant detrimental effect on the competition downstream, as
     competing mobile wallet providers would be able to circumvent the foreclosure and
     still offer their competing mobile wallets.
     Risk of foreclosure of competing M(V)NOS in Belgium from offering the BmWallet to
     their customers
     The Notifying Parties' view
206. With regards to mobile telephony services, the Notifying Parties point out that the
     functioning of the BmWallet as an open platform will not depend on the identity of
     the MNO offering the mobile telephony service to end consumers. Any customer of an
     MNO competing with Belgacom will be able to download the BmWallet App on his /
     her smartphone, and to rely on the services it offers. The BmWallet will also not force
     consumers to opt for Belgacom as the BmWallet is not a "must have" product.
207. The Notifying Parties state that, once the SIM-based SEs become available, Belgacom
     will potentially be active as a supplier of secure SIM card storage (like any other
     MNO) to the BmWallet. The BmWallet would then offer two security options (that is
     to say software-based, and SIM card-based) in parallel. In the cases where Mobile ID
     on the SIM card is not yet supported (for example if the handset or the M(V)NO is not
71   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     questions 16 and 16.1; to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September 2013, questions 16 and
     16.1; to Questionnaire Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6 September 2013, questions 15 and
     15.1; and to Questionnaire Q4 to suppliers of 6 September 2013, questions 15 and 15.1.
                                                    36

     yet ready for a SIM-based SE) there is still the possibility of downloading the
     BmWallet App which would continue to rely on a software-based Mobile ID.
     Belgacom would therefore not be in a technical position to use the SIM-based SE to
     prevent other M(V)NOs from offering access to the BmWallet.
208. The Notifying Parties also stress that the success of the BmWallet will ultimately be a
     function of the number of consumers using the wallet. Therefore, the BmWallet JV
     will not have the incentive to limit the access to the BmWallet to Belgacom customers
     since such strategy would not be rational from a commercial perspective.
     The Commission's assessment
209. As regards the ability to foreclose, according to the Notifying Parties, the BmWallet
     will use in the first stage a security solution that will be software based, rather than an
     SE. Therefore, customers with any mobile connection will be able to download the
     BmWallet App to their mobile devices, irrespective of the MNO providing the mobile
     connection.
210. However, the Commission notes that the BmWallet JV plans in a second stage to
     transfer the SE from the cloud to the SIM card. SIM cards are owned and controlled
     by MNOs and therefore agreements will need to be made between the BmWallet JV
     and each MNO issuing SIM cards in Belgium for access to the SIM in order to place
     the SE. The BmWallet JV could potentially only agree to be installed on Belgacom's
     SIM cards, and hence refuse to be installed on other SIM cards. One financial services
     respondent to the Commission's investigation expressed concern that too much control
     is given to a single stakeholder, Belgacom and that the BmWallet JV would be able
     technically to exclude other MNOs from making available the BmWallet to their
     customers.72
211. On this basis, the Commission considers that the BmWallet JV would have the ability
     to foreclose access to the BmWallet only to Belgacom customers, if it operates a SIM-
     based SE and discontinues its software based security. The result of this foreclosure
     strategy would be that consumers of other M(V)NOs in Belgium would no longer
     have access to the BmWallet.
212. However, such strategy would have limited success, as customers of other M(V)NOs
     would still have access to other competing mobile wallets, such as the retail
     MasterPass and V.me wallets branded by other Belgian banks.
213. As regards incentives, such foreclosure strategy would be detrimental to the uptake of
     the BmWallet, as it would limit it to a relatively small share of the population (that is
     to say only to Belgacom customers). The foreclosure would prevent more than 60% of
     the market (who are not Belgacom subscribers) from using the BmWallet.
214. The market investigation has shown that in order for a mobile wallet to get end-user
     acceptance and widespread use of the product, the wallet should be accessible to any
     person in Belgium who has a payment card and a smartphone. Given the nascent
     nature of mobile wallets, consumers are still not used to them and want to try as many
     different wallets as possible in order to decide which ones offer the features that they
     need, as well as to have access to the widest possible variety of offers, coupons and
72   See Responses to Questionnaire Q3 to competing financial institutions of 6 September 2013, question
     25.
                                                37

     vouchers in order to compare the services (and quality of promotions and loyalty
     programmes) offered by each mobile wallet. Therefore, consumers will not choose a
     new entrant in this market that would restrict the availability of its wallet.
215. This is confirmed by almost all respondents in the market investigation. One wallet
     provider commented that "it would seem reasonable to expect that the JV / parents
     would want to encourage participation of the non-participating M(V)NOs and non-
     participating financial institutions in order to develop and expand the number of
     cardholders and merchants who can access the JV's container wallet." Another wallet
     provider confirmed that "the BmWallet will only be successful if it benefits from a very
     wide consumer adoption. This would also ensure that many merchants would support
     the wallet. It is therefore important for the JV that the BmWallet is open to as many
     consumers as possible, i.e. non-Belgacom customers and non-BNPPF customers. It
     would be preferable to assume that commercially it would be preferable for the JV /
     parents to expand that ecosystem as much as possible and to include more
     cardholders and merchants."73
216. This view is supported by every financial institution respondent and M(V)NO
     respondent. For instance, as one respondent explained, "By making the BmWallet
     accessible to everyone, the JV will become more attractive to merchants and retailers
     to participate in. This will increase return."74
217. On this basis of the above, it is most likely that the Notifying Parties would also not
     have the incentive to foreclose competing M(V)NOs from offering the BmWallet to
     their customers.
218. Furthermore, in the event that such foreclosure strategy were to be adopted, it would
     not have any significant detrimental effect on the competition downstream, as non-
     Belgacom customers could turn to competing mobile wallets, such as the retail
     MasterPass and V.me wallets of banks, possible future entrants of banks and
     M(V)NOs wallets, established online payment wallets (such as PayPal and Apple) and
     mobile wallets already functioning in other countries (such as the Google Wallet),
     which could enter the Belgian market.
219. Finally, the Commission considers that also given the low likelihood that a foreclosure
     strategy would be successful, it is unlikely that BNP Paribas Fortis, the other parent of
     the BmWallet JV, would favour such a foreclosure strategy as it would undermine the
     potential revenues of the BmWallet JV. BNP Paribas Fortis would not have any
     incentive to agree to it. As the BmWallet JV is a jointly controlled venture, it is
     unlikely that such strategic decision would be agreed upon.
4.2  Vertical links with banking services and card issuing services in particular
220. The proposed transaction will give rise to vertical links between the activities of the
     BmWallet JV in the retail distribution of mobile wallet services and the banking
     activities of BNP Paribas Fortis, mainly in relation to payment card issuing services.
     The BmWallet does not transact payments. The BmWallet JV will contract with
73   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     question 9 and question 24.
74   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     questions 12, 12.1, 13 and 13.1; and to Questionnaire Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6
     September 2013, questions 12 and 12.1.
                                                38

     providers of retail payment wallets (that is to say banks such as BNP Paribas Fortis or
     others) to authorise their retail payment wallets to operate within the BmWalletfor
     payments. These retail payment wallets may be based on wholesale platforms created
     by the card schemes, such as V.me and MasterPass, for their members (that is the
     banks). Retail payment wallets may also be independent solutions.
221. In order for a retail payment wallet to be accepted into the BmWallet as a payment
     wallet, each issuer of a retail payment wallet (such as banks utilising the MasterPass
     or V.me wallet platforms) will need to enter into a free "Service Provider" agreement
     with the BmWallet JV, to make its service accessible to BmWallet end users.75
222. Any credit institution established in Belgium is free to join the MasterPass platform,
     create its customised retail mobile payment wallet and allow its customers to upload
     its payment cards on it.
223. The Notifying Parties consider that the BmWallet will make it easier to use the retail
     MasterPass wallets in a mobile environment and that the BmWallet integrates other
     aspects of the payment experience that MasterPass is not offering at this stage (such as
     couponing and loyalty programmes).
224. The wholesale MasterPass wallet platform is designed as an open environment and
     allows the bank which issues the retail Masterpass payment wallet to accept a number
     of different payment cards of different card schemes (for example MasterCard, Visa,
     American Express) and different banks (for example Belfius, ING, BNP Paribas
     Fortis). However, the ultimate decision on which cards will be accepted on each
     payment wallet rests alone on each provider of the retail payment wallet, that is on
     each bank.
225. Therefore, the banks operating their customised retail MasterPass payment wallet can
     specify which cards their MasterPass wallet will accept and can limit the cards to only
     the cards that their bank issues. This means that a customised BNP Paribas Fortis
     payment wallet could restrict the cards only to BNP Paribas Fortis cards. Similarly,
     other banks could do the same for their own customised wallets. The same applies for
     other wholesale wallets such as the V.me wallet and for independent solutions.
226. The Commission has examined the following two foreclosure theories:
     i.     Whether the (a) BmWallet JV would have the ability and incentive to foreclose
            other payment wallets (such as a retail MasterPass and / or V.me payment
            wallets of other banks) from being accepted into the BmWallet and (b) whether
            BNP Paribas Fortis would have the ability and incentive to foreclose the
            payment cards of other banks from being accepted into the BNP Paribas Fortis
            retail MasterPass wallet or prioritise its own payment cards over the payment
            cards of other banks in the BNP Paribas Fortis retail MasterPass wallet, and
            whether such foreclosure strategies would have a significant detrimental effect
            in the competition downstream on the markets for the provision of card payment
            services in Belgium; and
     ii.    Whether BNP Paribas Fortis would have the ability and incentive (a) to
            foreclose the BNP Paribas Fortis MasterPass retail payment wallet from being
75   See Notifying Parties' Replies on 27 September 2013 to the Commission's questions of 26 September
     2013.
                                                  39

            used in other mobile wallets and (b) to foreclose the BNP Paribas Fortis
            payment cards from being used in the payment wallets of other banks and
            whether such foreclosure strategies would have a significant detrimental effect
            in the competition downstream on the market for the retail distribution of
            mobile wallets services in Belgium.
     Risk of foreclosure of competing banks in Belgium from having their retail payment
     wallets accepted by the BmWallet JV and from having their payment cards accepted
     by the BNP Paribas Fortis payment wallet
     The Notifying Parties' view
227. In relation to the risk of foreclosure of other retail payment wallets (for instance an
     ING payment wallet or a Belfius payment wallet, etc.) from the BmWallet, the
     Notifying Parties have declared that the BmWallet will be connected to any retail
     payment wallet as there would be no technical reason preventing such connection.
     Furthermore, connection of the BmWallet with more than one retail payment wallet
     would be in the BmWallet JV’s interest as it would increase its potential customer
     base. The Notifying Parties would consider positively a partnership with additional
     payment wallets if an interest were raised in the future.
228. In relation to the risk of foreclosure of payment cards of other banks from the BNP
     Paribas Fortis payment wallet (based on the wholesale MasterCard platform), the
     Notifying Parties state that MasterPass is independent of BNP Paribas Fortis, and so is
     MasterCard (for example in terms of share capital, composition of the board and
     latitude to set payment card rules). Therefore, the BmWallet JV would not be in a
     position to instruct MasterPass (or, more generally, MasterCard) not to accept cards
     issued by other financial institutions. Once these cards are issued on MasterPass, they
     may be used to transact via the BmWallet. The BmWallet JV does not have the
     technical ability to refuse transactions through non-BNP Paribas Fortis cards on
     MasterPass as it will not be able to see the card number nor the card issuer in each
     transaction. The BmWallet will only be able to see an alias, and therefore is not able
     to treat card issuers differently.
229. In addition, according to the Notifying Parties, it would run against their commercial
     interest to limit access to the BmWallet (for instance, by excluding clients of
     competing banks) as this would significantly reduce the potential consumer base of
     the BmWallet, and would be detrimental to its commercial success.
     The Commission's assessment
230. The Commission understands however that the operation and control of the retail
     payment wallet rests on each retail wallet provider, that is to say on each bank. This
     means that the BNP Paribas Fortis payment wallet (using the wholesale MasterPass
     platform) will be controlled and operated by BNP Paribas Fortis and not by
     MasterCard.
231. In relation to the ability to restrict the BmWallet to the BNP Paribas Fortis
     (MasterPass) payment wallet as the only retail payment wallet, it is clear that the
     Notifying Parties will have such ability, as they control the BmWallet JV and thus
     they control who the BmWallet JV enters into contractual agreements with.
232. Similarly, in relation to the ability to restrict the payment cards available on the retail
     BNP Paribas Fortis payment wallet, BNP Paribas Fortis will be in a position to
                                               40

     determine which payment cards it wants to accept on its customised retail MasterPass
     (or in the future on its customised retail V.me) payment wallet. The MasterPass
     platform has been designed as an open platform and it is possible for a bank to accept
     a variety of payment cards, including the payment cards of other banks. However, this
     is for each issuer of the retail payment wallet to decide. Some respondents to the
     market investigation expressed concerns that the BmWallet JV could prioritise one
     payment card over another,76 for example by selecting by default the BNP Paribas
     Fortis payment card. The Commission understands that each bank can decide how to
     prioritise the payment cards on its own retail payment wallets.
233. Thus, BNP Paribas Fortis can determine which payment cards will be accepted on its
     payment wallet and how they will be prioritised. It cannot determine which cards the
     retail payment wallets of other banks will choose to accept.
234. However, the BmWallet JV is a new entrant into the dynamic market for mobile
     wallet services. Mobile payment wallets do not necessarily need to be placed inside
     mobile wallets such as the BmWallet and sometime retail payment wallets incorporate
     on their own some of the functions of the BmWallet (such as links with rewards and
     advertising / data analytics services). Moreover, there are other alternatives in the
     market, including other current and potential mobile wallets. Therefore, competing
     banks will find an alternative solution both for their competing payment wallets and
     for their competing payment cards.
235. Therefore, the Commission considers that the BmWallet JV would have the ability to
     foreclose access to the BmWallet only to the BNP Paribas Fortis payment wallet(s)
     and in turn that BNP Paribas Fortis would have the ability to foreclose the payment
     cards of other banks from being accepted on the BNP Paribas Fortis retail payment
     wallet. However, the BmWallet JV and BNP Paribas Fortis would not have the ability
     to foreclose competing payment wallet providers and competing banks from the
     market, as there are a number of alternative options available.
236. In relation to the incentives to restrict the payment wallets of other banks from
     working with the BmWallet, the Commission considers that neither the BmWallet JV
     nor Belgacom have such incentives.
237. The Commission considers that the BmWallet JV would have an incentive to keep the
     system open and accept as many payment methods as possible, as this would ensure
     that the BmWallet finds wide acceptance among users who may prefer different types
     of retail payment wallets. The respondents to the market investigation have indicated
     that the more open the BmWallet JV is, the easier it will be to find widespread
     acceptance both from consumers and from merchants.77
238. Respondents to the market investigation confirmed that "the MasterPass wallet is by
     nature an open wallet which enables consumers to upload any payment cards into it
     without constraints. Registering a payment card in the MasterPass wallet can be
     compared to registering a card in an internet merchant's wallet (e.g. the Amazon "one
     click" wallet). Although it could technically be possible for the issuer of a MasterPass
76   See Responses to Questionnaire Q3 to competing financial institutions of 6 September 2013, question
     12.
77   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     questions 12 to 14; to Questionnaire Q2 to competing MNOs of 6 September 2013, questions 12 and
     12.1
                                                  41

     wallet to block the upload of cards by competing issuers, the interest of the JVC will
     be to attract as many users as possible to establish an attractive market position. In
     such a context, it is not in the interest of the JV to limit the consumers' enrolment e.g.
     to Belgacom customers and / or BNP Paribas customers."78
239. As regards the incentives of BNP Paribas Fortis to foreclose payment cards of other
     banks from its retail payment wallet, all financial institutions who responded to the
     Commission's market investigation agreed that the BmWallet would not have an
     incentive to restrict the use of the retail payment wallet only to BNP Paribas Fortis
     customers.79 Both the BmWallet JV and BNP Paribas Fortis have an interest that both
     the BmWallet but also the retail BNP Paribas Fortis payment wallet can be accessed
     by customers of any financial institution, whether or not customers of BNP Paribas
     Fortis, so that merchants can accept cards from all customers and not only those that
     are offered by BNP Paribas Fortis.80
240. If such foreclosure strategy were to be adopted, it would likely not have any
     significant detrimental effect either on the competition downstream, as competing
     banks would be able to circumvent the BmWallet JV and still offer their cards either
     in competing mobile wallets or as stand-alone payment wallets.
241. On the basis of the above, it is most likely that the Notifying Parties and the
     BmWallet JV have no incentive to block competing banks' payment wallets from
     being accepted in the BmWallet wallet and no incentive to block competing banks'
     payment cards from being accepted in the BNP Paribas Fortis payment wallet.
242. Finally, given the low likelihood that a foreclosure strategy would be successful, it is
     unlikely that Belgacom, the other parent of the BmWallet JV, would favour such a
     foreclosure strategy, as it would undermine the potential revenues of the BmWallet
     JV. Belgacom would not have any incentive to agree to it. As the BmWallet JV is a
     jointly controlled venture, it is unlikely that such strategic decision would be agreed
     upon.
     Risk of foreclosure of the BNP Paribas Fortis retail payment wallet from competing
     mobile wallets and of the BNP Paribas Fortis payment cards from competing retail
     payment wallets of other banks
     The Notifying Parties' view
243. In relation to the risk of foreclosure of the BNP Paribas Fortis retail payment wallet
     from other mobile wallets, the Notifying Parties state that BNP Paribas Fortis would
     not be in a position to instruct MasterPass not to offer its services to competing mobile
     wallets.
244. In relation to the risk of foreclosure of the BNP Paribas Fortis' payment cards from
     payment wallets of competing banks, the Notifying Parties state that BNP Paribas
78   See Responses to Questionnaire Q1 to competing mobile wallet providers of 6 September 2013,
     question 13.
79   The Notifying Parties estimate that BNP Paribas Fortis has a [20-30]% market share in the market
     segment for the issuing of debit cards in Belgium, and [20-30]% in the market segment for the issuing
     of credit cards in Belgium (2011 estimates).
80   See Responses to Questionnaire Q3 to competing Financial Institutions of 6 September 2013, questions
     12 and 12.1.
                                                    42

     Fortis' payment cards issued on MasterPass will be available for use on any competing
     mobile wallet that would rely on the MasterPass wallet platform. From a technical
     perspective, depending on the wallet, BNP Paribas Fortis does not necessarily see the
     enrolment transaction (and cannot stop it) and / or BNPPF does not necessarily see
     that the payment transaction comes from a wallet (and cannot treat it differently).
     From a business and contractual perspective, BNP Paribas Fortis has no interest in
     blocking its payment cards from being used via a competing retail payment wallet.
245. The Notifying Parties point out that in view of the presence of significant competitors
     in Belgium for the issuing of debit or credit cards (for example KBC, ING, Belfius), it
     would not be in the commercial interest of BNP Paribas Fortis to restrict the use of its
     credit and debit cards to the BmWallet, as this may weaken its competitive positions
     vis-à-vis these other players.
     The Commission's assessment
246. The Commission understands that MasterPass is a wholesale payment platform
     developed by MasterCard which each bank can customise and offer to the banks'
     customers on a retail basis. Therefore, the operation of each retail MasterPass wallet
     will be in the control of each bank.
247. In relation to the ability to restrict the BNP Paribas Fortis payment wallet only to the
     BmWallet, it is clear that BNP Paribas Fortis will have such ability, as it will control
     its own retail payment wallet and thus will control the contractual arrangements in
     relation to all mobile wallets.
248. Similarly, in relation to the ability to restrict the availability of the BNP Paribas Fortis
     payment cards only to the BmWallet, BNP Paribas Fortis will be in a position to
     determine which retail payment wallets it wishes to make its payment cards available
     to. It is technically possible for a bank to authorise its cards to be available to all
     payment wallets or to be restricted to only a few. This is for each issuer of payment
     cards to decide.
249. Thus, BNP Paribas Fortis can determine which mobile wallets its payment cards will
     be available in. It cannot of course determine which wallets the payment cards of other
     banks will choose.
250. However, there are alternative payment cards and alternative payment wallets which
     operate on the market or may enter in the future. Therefore, competing mobile and
     retail payment wallets will be able to resort to another bank for card payment and
     mobile payment wallet services. Therefore, the Commission considers that BNP
     Paribas Fortis would have the ability to foreclose access to its payment wallet only for
     the BmWallet and in turn that BNP Paribas Fortis would have the ability to foreclose
     the payment wallets of other banks from processing BNP Paribas Fortis retail payment
     cards. However, the BmWallet JV and BNP Paribas Fortis would not have the ability
     to foreclose competing mobile and payment wallets from finding alternative retail
     payment wallets and alternative payment cards. Therefore, BNP Paribas Fortis would
     not have the ability to foreclose competitors from the market.
251. In relation to the incentives to restrict the retail payment wallets of BNP Paribas Fortis
     from working with other mobile wallets, the Commission considers that it is unlikely
     that BNP Paribas Fortis would have such incentives.
                                                43

252. The Commission considers that BNP Paribas Fortis would have an incentive to keep
     the system open and allow its retail payment wallet to be included in as many mobile
     wallets as possible, as this would ensure that the BNP Paribas Fortis retail payment
     wallet finds wide acceptance among users who may prefer different types of mobile
     wallets.
253. Moreover, even if this strategy has some advantages to the BmWallet JV, it would
     disadvantage BNP Paribas Fortis, as it would restrict the use of its retail payment
     wallet. Since it is for BNP Paribas Fortis to decide the availability of its retail payment
     wallet, it is unlikely that BNP Paribas Fortis would favour such a foreclosure strategy
     that would marginally favour the BmWallet JV but undermine the BNP Paribas Fortis
     core business activity.
254. If such foreclosure strategy were to be adopted, it would likely not have any
     significant detrimental effect either on the competition downstream, as competing
     mobile wallets to the BmWallet would be able to circumvent the BNP Paribas Fortis
     retail payment wallet and accept retail payment wallets of other banks.
255. As regards the incentives of BNP Paribas Fortis to foreclose the retail payment wallets
     from other banks from accepting its payment cards, BNP Paribas Fortis has an interest
     that its payment cards can be accessed by customers using any payment wallet,
     whether or not the retail payment wallet of BNP Paribas Fortis.
256. If such strategy were to be adopted, it would not have any significant detrimental
     effect on the competition downstream, as competing payment wallets would be able to
     circumvent the foreclosure and offer the payment cards of other banks on their retail
     payment wallets.
257. On this basis of the above, it is most likely that BNP Paribas Fortis have no incentive
     to block their retail payment wallets from being used on competing mobile wallets and
     to block their payment cards from being used on competing retail payment wallets of
     other banks.
VI.  CONCLUSION
258. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the proposed
     concentration and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
     Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
     Regulation.
                                                      For the Commission
                                                      (signed)
                                                      Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                      Vice-President
                                              44
