                             EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                               Brussels, 29/01/2014
                                                               C(2014) 542 final
  In the published version of this decision, some
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article                       PUBLIC VERSION
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                       MERGER PROCEDURE
  general description.
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:      No COMP/M.7078 - SANTANDER CONSUMER FINANCE / EL CORTE
              INGLES / FINANCIERA EL CORTE INGLES
              Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
              No 139/20041
(1)       On 13 December 2013, the European Commission received a notification of a
          proposed concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No
          139/20042 by which Santander Customers Finance S.A ("SCF", Spain), ultimately
          controlled by Banco Santander S.A., and El Corte Inglés S.A. ("ECI", Spain),
          collectively referred to as " the Parties", acquire within the meaning of Article
          3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation, joint control of Financiera El Corte Inglés S.A.
          ("FECI", Spain) by way of purchase of shares, hereinafter "the proposed
          transaction".
1.        THE PARTIES
(2)       SCF is active in the provision of finance services in Spain, Portugal and other
          countries. It offers finance products to customers at point of sale (through car
1       OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ('the Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
        the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
        replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
        the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2       Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 373,20.12.2013, p. 31.
Commission européenne, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE / Europese Commissie, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË. Tel.: +32 229-91111.

    dealers or merchant outlets) and directly through its own branches, on the Internet
    and via telemarketing. SCF belongs to Banco Santander Group which is active in
    the retail, corporate and investment banking, asset management and insurance in
    the EEA and the Americas.
(3) ECI is the parent company of El Corte Inglés Group, active in the field of retail
    distribution based on the department store model. ECI operates various types of
    stores: hypermarkets, supermarkets and convenience stores, travel agencies and
    optical shops. It also offers life insurance policies, services in the
    telecommunication technology sector and sells goods through teleshopping. ECI is
    active in Spain and Portugal.
(4) FECI is a credit institution within the meaning of Spanish law and is currently
    solely controlled by ECI. It provides credit services in connection with the
    purchases made in stores of the ECI Group and other stores with which it has
    bilateral arrangements. FECI is mainly active in the market for personal credit to
    customers for financing the purchase of goods as well as in the market for the
    issuing of payment cards, namely, store cards. Other activities carried out by FECI
    include value added tax (VAT) refund management services to customers, factoring
    services, and, insurance mediation services.
2.  THE OPERATION
(5) The proposed transaction consists in the acquisition of 51% of the shares and the
    voting rights on FECI by SCF from ECI, pursuant to the Share Purchasing
    Agreement signed on 7 October 2013. On the same day ECI, FECI and SCF have
    entered in a Shareholders' Agreement defining the new corporate governance
    structure.
    Joint control
(6) Following the transaction, FECI's board of directors will have seven members
    appointed by the shareholders meeting, four of them on a proposal of SCF and three
    of them on a proposal of ECI. The non-executive Chairman of the board will be
    appointed by the 3 directors nominated by ECI after consultation with SCF,
    whereas those directors nominated by SCF will appoint the CEO after consultation
    with ECI.
(7) Certain "board reserved matters" will require a decision with a favourable vote of
    five out of seven board directors, including among others: (i) the approval and
    amendments of the business plan and the budgets; (ii) the amendments of the
    current conditions of FECI's commercial policy; (iii) investments in operating asset
    or any other asset related to FECI's business in excess of EUR […], provided that
    they were not envisaged in the business plan or the annual budget; conclusion,
    amendments or termination of financing agreements entered into by FECI or its
    subsidiary for an aggregated amount in excess of EUR […]; (iv) the establishment
    of strategic agreements or alliances having as their object the development of
    FECI's business.
(8) It follows from the above that the strategic decisions related to FECI's commercial
    policy are jointly adopted by SFC and ECI. Therefore, FECI will be jointly
    controlled by the Notifying Parties.
                                             2

      Full-functionality
(9)   The Parties submit that FECI has sufficient resources to operate independently on
      the market, holds the necessary authorisations and meets the capital requirements to
      exercise the activities of a specialised credit institution in Spain. It also has its own
      management as well as 700 employees, including teams dedicated to client
      management, risk control and promotion. Furthermore, FECI has its own assets and
      in particular it owns the IT system containing the applications necessary for cards
      management, operation and credit risk, administration system, comprising a
      database of transactions and customers, as well as customer management
      applications; a risk management system, an accounting system, an information
      system, and lastly a quality assurance system.
(10)  Further, FECI has access to its own portfolio of customers and it provides private
      label card acceptance services to merchants such as Repsol, Burger King, Cinesa or
      Galeries Lafayette. […].
(11)  The vast majority of FECI's revenues stem from transactions with third parties and
      customers: end customers who finance their purchases using the "personal payment
      formula" or private label card, which represent [50-60]%, and fees paid by other
      companies than ECI, which represent [10-20]% of the income. FECI is remunerated
      at arm's length for services provided to ECI.
(12)  Lastly FECI has been active on the market for the last 17 years and the parties
      intend to maintain the joint control at least for a period of >8 years. Therefore,
      FECI will operate on a lasting basis.
(13)  It follows from the above that FECI will be a full-function joint venture. Therefore,
      the proposed transaction constitutes an acquisition of joint control over the whole
      of an undertaking within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
3.    EU DIMENSION
(14)  The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
      than EUR 5 000 million3, namely EUR 96 960 million. Each of them has an EU-wide
      turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (Banco Santander S.A.: EUR […] million,
      ECI: EUR […] million and FECI: EUR […] million), but they do not achieve more
      than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same
      Member State.
(15)  The notified operation therefore has a EU dimension within the meaning of Article
      1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
4.    MARKET DEFINITION
(16)  FECI provides the following credit services exclusively in connection with
      purchases made in stores of the ECI Group and in stores with which it has bilateral
      agreements: (i) personal loans to customers and, (ii) financing through private label
3    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
     Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p1).
                                                     3

          cards. It also provides VAT refund management services, factoring services and
          card management services. Other activities include the distribution of non-life
          insurance products which are offered together with payment cards. FECI is also
          active in the field of customer credit and card issuing in Spain and marginally in
          Portugal.
(17)      SCF is active in the provision of card-based customer credit, customer credit
          granted via loans, customer credit activities for the purchase of motor vehicles,
          payment card issuing, including private label cards and management services for
          card payment in Spain and Portugal.
(18)      ECI is a large retail distribution company based on a department store model in
          Spain and in Portugal.
(19)      The proposed transaction gives rise to horizontal overlaps resulting in affected
          markets only in Spain as regards (i) the provision of consumer credit, in particular,
          the provision of consumer credit through loans, and (ii) the issuing of payment
          cards, in particular, the issuing of personal credit/charge cards and the issuing of
          personal pure store cards.
(20)      The proposed transaction also leads to limited horizontal overlaps in Portugal in the
          market for consumer credit and the issuing of payment cards and their respective
          segments. Nevertheless it does not result in affected markets even at the narrowest
          possible level. Thus, these overlaps will not be further examined.
(21)      Furthermore, there is a pre-existing vertical link between the activities of ECI and
          FECI on the markets for retail distribution of goods in Spain and the provision of
          financing services. However, these vertical links do not result in affected markets
          either and, therefore, they will not be further assessed.
4.1.      Relevant product market
   4.1.1.     The market for issuing of payment cards
(22)      In its previous decisional practice, the Commission has distinguished three main
          card-related activities: the issuing of cards to individuals and companies; card
          processing; and the “acquiring” of merchants (including hotels, airlines and other
          businesses accepting cards) for card payment acceptance.4
(23)      Within the activity of issuing payment cards, the Commission has considered that
          debit cards and credit/charge cards belong to separate markets.5
(24)      Charge cards6 and credit cards7 have been considered by the Commission to be part
          of the same relevant product market as regards the payment function, since both
4       Case COMP/M.5241 - American Express/Fortis/Alpha Card, para, COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas /
        Fortis, para. 14, Case No COMP/M.6164 -Barclays Bank/ Egg credit card assets, para. 9.
5       Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, paras 14-16, Case No COMP/M.6164 - Barclays bank /
        Egg credit card assets, para 10.
6       Charge cards, also known as "deferred debit cards", are required to be settled on a net basis in full at
        the statement due date and do not offer credit. Statements are issued periodically, typically on a
                                                        4

       types of cards offer similar payment services, although the credit function differs
       between them.8
(25)   Within the group of credit/charge cards, it is possible to operate a distinction
       between special purpose cards and universal cards. The Commission has previously
       found that special purpose cards consist of pure store cards which are accepted for
       payment only in all commercial outlets of a given brand or selection of brands and
       within a limited geographic scope. For the purposes of this decision special purpose
       or pure store cards will be referred to as pure store cards.
(26)   Universal cards include both hybrid store cards9 as well as cards which do not have
       any association with particular store brands, and are characterised by much wider
       acceptance for payments at a range of commercial outlets. Universal cards carry the
       brands of payment networks.10
(27)   The Notifying Parties submit that pure store cards could be used by the merchant
       for its promotional strategy and may include complementary services such as
       insurance. In practice these cards enable the merchants to encourage customer
       loyalty and to obtain information on purchasing patterns and the consumption
       profile. In the case of FECI, pure purpose cards constitute a further element of the
       merchant's commercial offer. In this regard, the Notifying Parties consider that pure
       store cards compete with other services offered to customers on the market to
       which the particular retail store or chain belongs.
(28)   The Notifying Parties contest the existence of a market segment consisting in the
       issuing of pure store cards. According to them, pure store cards are not
       substitutable products from the demand side. Moreover, they do not compete in the
       same store, since once the customer has decided to carry out a purchase in a
       particular shop, pure store cards do not compete with each other. Rather, such cards
       play a role in the customer's decision as a part of the retailer's commercial offer.
       Furthermore, from the supply side (the moment merchants offer such cards to
       customers) pure store cards are not mutually exclusive products, as a customer may
       hold several of them.
     monthly basis. Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph
     19.
7    Credit cards in the strict sense, also referred to as "revolving credit cards", require the customer only
     to settle a fraction of the outstanding balance figuring on periodic statements of account. The
     remaining part of the outstanding balance may be carried over to the next statement period, in which
     case interest charges become due. The customer disposes of a credit facility up to a pre-arranged
     ceiling which is replenished as repayments are made on the outstanding amount. Case COMP/M.5384
     BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 19.
8    Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, Decision of 3 December 2008, paragraph 35; Case No
     COMP/M.6164 -Barclays Bank/ Egg credit card assets, para. 10.
9    Hybrid store cards offer particular conditions or services when used in the sponsoring store or
     collection of stores, and carry a proprietary logo, but can still be used in other establishments, whether
     nationally or internationally, for which purpose they are co-branded with national or international
     payment scheme logos (see Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, para 19).
10   Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, para 22.
                                                         5

(29)  The market investigation has largely confirmed that card issuing constitutes a
      separate product market. Moreover, respondents to the market investigation have
      pointed out that differences between universal cards and pure store cards could
      support a further market segmentation into the issuing of universal cards, and the
      issuing of pure store cards.11
(30)  A segmentation into the a market for the issuing of universal cards and the issuing
      of pure store cards could be justified on grounds of supply-side considerations,
      namely, different commercial conditions governing the relations between retailers
      and card issuers as well as particularities in the infrastructure needed for the issuing
      of universal or pure store cards. In particular, different fees apply to the use of each
      type of card. Moreover, universal and pure store cards are subject to different risk
      scoring, which is usually lower for the latter type of cards. As regards the
      technological infrastructure, pure store cards require specific computer applications
      for their customization according to a partner’s preferences. Universal cards must
      also comply with brand-specific regulations (e.g. Visa, Mastercard or America
      Express), which renders them more standardised financial products as opposed to
      special-purpose cards, which are issued in consideration of the brand needs, e.g. the
      brand's sales strategy.12
(31)  The results of the market investigation suggest that, from the supply side, universal
      cards and pure store cards show limited substitutability. From the demand side, the
      market investigation has confirmed13 that there is a degree of substitutability
      between the two types of cards, since both types of cards can be used to pay at the
      same outlets, including those which offer pure store cards. However, pure store
      cards often have specific advantages which do not apply to universal cards, for
      example in terms of promotional programs. In this regard, customers hold an
      interest to hold a pure store card. A customer who holds a pure store card is
      therefore likely a priori to use it in preference to universal cards at the outlets
      which the card serves, at least if the circumstances which motivated holding it in
      the first place have not changed.
(32)  The Commission has also distinguished between corporate cards (issued to
      employees for professional use), and personal cards (issued to private individuals
      for personal use)14. FECI does not provide corporate cards.
(33)  However, the precise product market definition can be left open, since the proposed
      transaction will not give raise to serious doubts regarding its compatibility with the
      internal market under any of the possible market definitions.
11   Non- confidential version of the replies to question 18 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
12   Non- confidential version of the replies of UNOE BANK SA, Banco Popular Español S.A., Grupo
     Caixa,to question 19 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
13   See also Case COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas / Fortis, para. 28.
14   Case COMP M. 5384 - BNP Paribas / Fortis (paras. 38 and 39); Case COMP/M.6164 -BARCLAYS
     BANK/ EGG CREDIT CARD ASSETS, para. 10.
                                                        6

   4.1.2.     The market for customer credit
(34)      The Commission has in previous decisions held that banking services can be
          divided into three main segments, (i) retail banking (ii) corporate banking and (iii)
          financial market services.15
(35)      Retail banking generally comprises all banking services to private individuals and
          very small enterprises, which consist inter alia of deposits and account services
          (current accounts, saving accounts etc.), lending (personal loans, consumer credit,
          overdraft facilities, mortgages etc.), payment services and investment products such
          as (mutual) funds and other forms of asset management. The Commission has
          considered some of these as separate markets in a number of decisions, although it
          has ultimately left open the exact market definition.
(36)      In Spain, customer credit is generally offered by banks having their own
          distribution network and by specialised credit institutions.
(37)      In previous decisions, the Commission has considered that the provision of card-
          based consumer credit and customer finance loans, which include loans sold
          directly via banks (personal credit), and finance at the point of sale (classical credit)
          belong to separate product markets.16
(38)      Loans are usually contracted in relation to specific purchases and are usually of an
          amount higher than that of individual purchases made using credit/charge cards.
          The repayments associated with such loans are regular and occur over a period
          which is agreed in advance (i.e., in instalments). The interest rates for these loans
          are generally lower than those applicable to card-based credit.
(39)      Loans can be contracted directly with the bank or credit institution (at their offices
          or by means of distance selling). Nevertheless, it is also quite common that
          contracts are entered into at the point of sale, for example, in respect of the
          purchase of motor vehicles.
(40)      In the case of loans afforded directly at the point of sale, it may be the case that the
          retailer assumes part or even all interests as promotional expenses. Consumer
          finance is thus an additional cost for the commercial chain, and not a source of
          income, as the purpose is to attract customers and encourage purchases.
(41)      Card-based finance is more flexible because the credit is automatically available for
          each transaction (provided that the consumer does not exceed the maximum credit
          limit agreed in advance and that there are no incidences during the payment
          process) and it does not require successive authorisations by the bank. This credit
          thus serves a distinct purpose in enabling customers to borrow in order to finance
15      See among others: COMP/M.5960 - Credit Agricole / Casa di Risparmio della Spezia / Agences
        Intesa Sanpaolo; COMP/M.5948 - Banco Santander / Rainbow; COMP/M.5811 - Erste Bank / ASK;
        COMP/M.5726 - Deutsche Bank / Sal. Oppenheim; 8 September 2009 on case COMP/M.5605 -
        Credit Mutuel / Monabanq; COMP/M.5432 - Credit Mutuel / Cofidis; COMP/M. 5363 - Santander /
        Bradford & Bingley Assets.
16      COMP/M.5241 - American Express/Fortis/Alpha Card, para, COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis,
        para. 14, Case No COMP/M.6164 -BARCLAYS BANK/ EGG CREDIT CARD ASSETS.
                                                    7

       short-term gaps in cash flow, regardless of the purchasing need or opportunity.
       Nonetheless, the interest rate of card-based finance is usually higher.
(42)   The Parties consider that from a demand side prospective there is an undeniable
       competitive pressure between card-based customer credit and customer credit
       granted via loan, given that customers can use any of these possibilities to finance
       the purchase of goods.
(43)   The market investigation has confirmed that card based customers credit should be
       viewed as a separate and distinct market from personal loans.17. A number of
       differences contribute to this assessment. Different risk policies apply to both card-
       based credit and to customer loans. The technologic infrastructure used for payment
       cards and customer loans is different. Both card-based credit and consumer loans
       have a different commercial policy, implying different commissions and interest
       rates due to the fact that consumer loans are considered to cover higher amounts for
       a specific purchase, whereas card-based credit is used to finance a variety of
       purchases of lower value.18
(44)   On the basis of the results of the market investigation, it could be considered that
       card based credit and customer loans belong to separate product markets. However
       the exact product market definition can be left open since the proposed transaction
       will not give raise to serious doubts regarding its compatibility with the internal
       market under any plausible market definition.
(45)   In the past, the Commission has also considered without taking a definitive position
       on the matter, whether card-based consumer credit should be further segmented
       into credit offered on universal cards and credit offered on private label store
       cards.19 However, the proposed transaction will not give raise to serious doubts
       regarding its compatibility with the internal market under any plausible market
       definition and, therefore, the exact product market definition can also be left open.
(46)   Furthermore, in previous decisions, the Commission has considered the possibility
       of segmenting the consumer credit market into consumer credit activities for the
       purchase of motor vehicles and consumer credit for the purchase of other consumer
       goods20. In the present case, SCF is active in the consumer credit segment for the
       purchase of motor vehicles, whereas FECI is not. However the precise product
       market definition can be left open since the proposed transaction will not give raise
       to serious doubts regarding its compatibility with the internal market irrespective of
       the market definition chosen.
17   Reply to question 5 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors. See also COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas /
     Fortis, para. 43.
18   Non- confidential version of the replies of Banco Popular Español, S.A, ING, Bankia, Cortefiel S.A.
     to question 6 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
19   COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis, para. 56.
20   COMP M.1370 - PEUGEOT                   /   CREDIPAR      and     M.3067   -   Intesa/Capitalia/IMI
     Investimento/Unicredito/FIDIS Retail
                                                      8

4.2.    Relevant geographic market
(47)    In its previous decisional practice, the Commission has consistently considered
        that, with regard to retail banking services, the relevant geographic market is
        national in scope due to the different competitive conditions within individual
        Member States and the importance of a network of branches21. This approach may
        also be followed in the present case.
(48)    The market investigation confirmed that the competition between suppliers which
        offer financing through loans or at the point of sale takes place mostly at national
        level.22 Consumer credit market in Spain is a mature market and is dominated by
        Spanish players who have a local presence.23 In addition, companies located outside
        of Spain are generally unable to exercise competitive pressure, since in order to
        compete efficiently, they need local presence.
(49)    As regards payment cards, the Commission indicated that the market for such
        market is national in scope even though it admitted that there may be scope for the
        widening of the market in the future24.
(50)    A majority of respondents to the market investigation largely confirmed that the
        competition between issuers of special purpose cards takes places at national level,
        and that companies located outside of Spain do not exercise significant competitive
        pressure in this market.25 Issuers located outside Spain issue mainly universal and
        prepaid cards for the Spanish market. This is due to the lower technical complexity
        of these cards and to the difficulty in controlling the card acquisition at the point of
        sale.26
(51)    Based on the above, it could be considered that both markets for payment card
        issuing and card-based consumer credit are national in scope. However the exact
        product market definition can be left open since the proposed transaction will not
        give raise to serious doubts regarding its compatibility with the EU internal market
        under any market definition.
5.      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
5.1.1.  Card issuing
(52)    The Notifying Parties’ activities in the market segment for credit/charge card
        issuing (including universal, hybrid and pure store cards) in Spain sheds a
        combined share of [10-20]% in terms of value (turnover), with an increment of [5-
21     COMP/M.4844, Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets; COMP/M.2578,                      Banco    Santander   Central
       Hispano/AKB; COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis, para. 72
22     Replies to question 8 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
23     Replies to question 9 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors. Non-confidential reply of Banco
       Popular Español, S.A. to question 9 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
24     COMP/M.3740, Barclays Bank/Föreningssparbanken/JV and COMP/M.2567 Nordbanken/Postgirot
25     Replies to questions 21 and 22 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
26     Non-confidential version of the reply of Unoe Bank S.A to question 22(1) of the Questionnaire Q1 to
       Competitors.
                                                         9

       10]% attributable to FECI, and [20-30]% in terms of volume (number of cards)
       with an increment of [5-10]% attributable to the Santander Group. The merged
       entity will also face competitive pressure from BBVA ([10-20]% by value; [10-
       20]% volume) and from CaixaBank ([10-20]% value; [5-10]% volume) as well as
       from several other smaller marker players.
(53)   A potential market segment for issuing of pure store cards in Spain would yield
       high combined market shares by the Notifying Parties. Such market share would be
       [60-70]% with an increment of [0-5]% due to SCF in outstanding debt value, [70-
       80]% with an increment of [0-5]% due to SCF in turnover value and [50-60]% with
       an increment of [0-5]% attributable to SCF in number of cards. Indeed, SCF's
       presence in this market segment would be very limited. In addition, SCF issues
       hybrid store cards (co-branded cards) for several merchants in Spain, but neither
       ECI nor FECI are active in this field. In light of this data, the proposed transaction
       will not have any substantial effect on the current market structure of such potential
       market segment. The resulting entity would also compete with BBVA (market
       share of [10-20]%), which offers special purpose/pure store cards to several large
       retail stores such as Zara (Inditex), Mango, Consum, or with Accordfin ([5-10]%),
       which also offers pure store cards to large retail chains, e.g. to Alcampo, Decathlon
       or Leroy Merlin.
(54)   The market investigation has emphasised that FECI would have strengths in the
       market for issuing of payment cards, in particular in the hypothetical market
       segment of pure store cards. These strengths imply access to the largest customer
       base27 in this market segment, a strong presence at the point of sale thanks to its
       mother company ECI's department stores and very good historical knowledge of
       customer behaviour, combined with significant experience in the operation of pure
       store cards as the main issuer of pure store cards in the Spanish market. Also, the
       high sales volume of ECI could facilitate the financing of customer purchases, for
       example, though the three-month interest free financing formula offered by FECI to
       its customers.28 However, the majority of the respondents of the market
       investigation also pointed out that there are no specific barriers to entry and
       expansion in this market segment, except for the need for commercial agreements
       with retailers with a large customer base wishing to offer pure store cards to their
       customers, and the fact that card issuers must comply with regulatory requirements,
       such as the need to become a financial entity under Spanish law and be granted a
       license to issue payment cards.29 Finally, despite the fact that three respondents
       raised concerns with regard to the development of the Notifying Parties’ market
       share mid-term, the vast majority of the respondents believe that the transaction
       would not have negative effects on pricing in the market for the issuing of pure
       store cards, since enough competitors would continue to exist post-transaction on
       this potential market segment and FECI accounts for the large majority of the
27   Access to such a large customer base resulting from the combination of SCF’s and FECI’s customer
     portfolios is, however, not merger specific, since it could be achieved by means of commercial
     agreements between market players.
28   Replies to questions 25 and 25.1 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
29   Replies to question 28 and 28.1 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
                                                      10

        combined share percentage with the entry of SCF not being significant enough to
        affect prices.30
(55)    As regards the market for credit/charge card issuing, in view of the moderate
        combined shares of the Notifying Parties and the existence of several strong players
        remaining post-transaction, the proposed transaction will not give rise to serious
        doubts as to its compatibility with the EU internal market.
(56)    As regards a potential market segment for the issuing of pure store cards,
        considering the very limited increment of the Notifying Parties post-transaction
        which would not bring about any substantial change in the market structure and in
        light of the results of the market investigation, it could also be concluded that the
        proposed transaction will not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with
        the EU internal market.
5.1.2.  Consumer credit
(57)    After completion of the proposed transaction, SCF's and FECI's combined market
        share in the overall market segment for consumer loans would amount to [10-20]%
        (with an increment of [0-5]% attributable to FECI) in terms of credit portfolio.
        FECI would continue to face competition from CaixaBank ([10-20]%) BBVA ([5-
        10]%), Banco Sabadell ([5-10]%) and several other market players which have
        market shares higher than FECI. In addition, SCF's market share has been
        decreasing in the last three years. If the market definition excluded credit for the
        purchase of motor vehicles, the combined market share would amount to [10-20]%.
        The competition would present a similar landscape in this second scenario, with
        Banco Sabadell ([10-20]%), CaixaBank ([5-10]%), Novagalicia Banco ([5-10]%)
        and five other market players having shares higher than the increment.
(58)    With regard to the specific segment for card based customer credit in Spain, the
        Notifying Parties' combined share would be below 15% ([10-20]%, with an
        increment of [0-5]% attributable to FECI). Therefore, the proposed transaction does
        not give rise to an affected market. In addition, there are other competitors with
        similar or higher market shares, namely CaixaBank ([10-20]%) and BBVA ([10-
        20]%), and five other financial institutions with shares higher than the increment.
(59)    The market investigation has revealed that SCF and FECI are close competitors.
        However, they are not necessarily the closest competitors to each other.31 Some
        credit institutions other than FECI are perceived to be closer competitors to SCF, as
        FECI currently provides financing for ECI’s retail store customers only.32
(60)    Almost all respondents to the market investigation have confirmed a high degree of
        market specialisation in the domain of consumer credit by SCF and FECI, with
        particular strength in the financing of purchases at the point of sale.33 The large
30     Replies to question 29 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors
31     Non-confidential version of the reply of UNOE BANK SA to question 10 of the Questionnaire Q1 to
       Competitors.
32     Non-confidential version of the reply to question UNOE BANK SA of the Questionnaire Q 1-
       Competitors
33     Replies to question 13 of Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
                                                        11

      retail business from ECI serving as a basis of customer acquisition to FECI is the
      main characteristic of the latter’s specialisation in this market.34 The market
      investigation indicated that access to retail distribution is a key element in order to
      be competitive in the market for consumer credit through cards as well as at the
      point of sale.35 However, this is not perceived to be an insurmountable barrier by
      respondents to the market investigation.36
(61)  The market investigation confirmed that the transaction would not to lead to
      negative impact on price in the market for consumer credit.37
(62)  Considering the moderate combined shares presented by the Notifying Parties and
      the existence of significant competitive pressure post-transaction, and in light of the
      results of the market investigation, the proposed transaction will not give rise to
      serious doubts as to its compatibility with the EU internal market regarding the
      market for consumers credit in Spain and its segments.
6.    CONCLUSION
(63)  For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
      notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
      EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
      Merger Regulation.
                                                           For the Commission
                                                           (Signed)
                                                           Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                           Vice-President
34   Replies to question 14 of Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
35   Replies to questions 14 and 15 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
36   Replies to question 16 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
37   Replies to question 17 of the Questionnaire Q1 to Competitors.
                                                      12
