                          EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 10.12.2013
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
                                                                 C(2010) 9152 final
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are                      PUBLIC VERSION
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.                                               MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:       Case No COMP/M.7081 - Centerbridge Partners/ Corsair Capital/ Royal
               Bank of Scotland Group
               Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
               No 139/20041
1. On 12 November 2013, the European Commission (the "Commission") received a
    notification of a proposed concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation
    by which the undertakings Centerbridge Partners L.P. ("Centerbridge", USA), Corsair
    Capital LLC ("Corsair", USA) and the Royal Bank of Scotland Group ("RBSG", UK)
    acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint control
    over certain assets of RBSG, namely the Rainbow Business (UK), by way of purchase
    of securities (the "Transaction").
2. Centerbridge, Corsair and RBSG are designated hereinafter as the "Notifying Parties".
3. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
      Transaction falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and does not raise serious
      doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market and the EEA Agreement.
      I.    THE PARTIES
4. Centerbridge is a multi-strategy institutional investment management firm, with
    activities principally in North America and Europe, focusing on private equity and credit
    investments across a variety of sectors, including transportation and logistics, retail and
    consumer, hospitality, business services, financial institutions, healthcare, industrial,
    communications and media and real estate.
1        OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ("the Merger Regulation"). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
         the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the
         replacement of "Community" by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The
         terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11.

5. Corsair is a private equity firm, based in New York, focusing on investing in companies
    in the financial services industry. Corsair, through firm-managed funds and by selected
    co-investors, provides capital to financial institutions in return for (primarily minority)
    interests through various instruments.
6. RBSG is the holding company of the RBS group of companies, which provides a wide
    range of banking and financial services worldwide. RBSG operates retail and
    commercial businesses with a focus on the UK, Republic of Ireland and United States,
    while its investment banking, wealth management and payments network have a wider
    international presence.
7. The Rainbow Business is one of the businesses which RBSG has committed to divest in
    connection with the Commission’s State aid approval decision of 14 December 2009 on
    RBSG’s restructuring (hereinafter referred to as "Decision of 14 December 2009".2 The
    Rainbow Business is currently wholly owned by RBSG and consists of certain parts of
    RBSG branch-related retail and SME business and certain mid-corporate accounts in the
    UK.
II.  THE OPERATION
8. On 21 October 2013, RBSG (pursuant to the Investment Agreement entered into by the
    Notifying Parties on 27 September 2013) issued a £600 million (app. EUR 740 million)
    bond (the "Bond") to […], a special purpose vehicle controlled by Centerbridge and
    Corsair created for the purpose of the Transaction.3 Under the terms of the Investment
    Agreement, the Rainbow Business will continue to be wholly owned by RBSG, but
    Centerbridge and Corsair, through […], will acquire certain veto rights over the
    commercial conduct of the Rainbow Business.4 […] Consequently, Centerbridge,
    Corsair and RBSG will acquire the joint control over the Rainbow Business.
9. The Transaction confers the ability to Centerbridge, Corsair and RBSG to exercise
    decisive influence over the Rainbow Business and therefore constitutes a concentration
    within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
III. EU DIMENSION
10. […]5. […] The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension within the meaning of
    Article 1(3) of the Merger Regulation.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
1. Market definition
11. The Transaction will lead only to a minimal overlap between the private equity investment
    activities of Corsair and Centerbridge in the UK, which is completely unrelated to the
    Transaction and to the activities of the Rainbow Business.
12. In addition, the Transaction will create certain minimal vertical relationships in the EEA
    between portfolio companies of Centerbridge, Corsair and RBSG in relation to:
2       Cases No N422/2009 and N621/2009.
3       The Bond will convert into shares in the Rainbow Business at the time of its IPO, anticipated to take
        place within the next two to three years.
4       Granting of these veto rights is conditional upon the Merger Regulation clearance.
5       […].
                                                           2

            a) supply of automated cash handling products on the one hand and supply of
                 cash sales services to the providers of automated cash handling products on
                 the other hand, and
            b) loan/mortgage servicing and the provision of corporate loans.
2. Assessment
13. There are no merger-specific, i.e. horizontal, overlaps between the activities of
    Centerbridge, Corsair and RBSG on the one hand and the Rainbow Business on the
    other hand in the same potential product and geographical market that would result in a
    combined market share of 15% or more.
14. Furthermore, Centerbridge, Corsair and RBSG do not have an individual or combined
    market share at either level of 25% or more in a potential product market which is
    upstream or downstream of a product market in which the Rainbow Business is
    engaged.
15. For these reasons, the Commission concludes that the Transaction will not lead to a
    significant impediment of competition in the above mentioned markets.
16. Furthermore, spill-over effects in the meaning of Article 2(4) of the Merger Regulation
    as a result of the Transaction can be discarded.
17. Apart from the links between the Rainbow Business and RBSG which are not merger-
    specific, none of the Notifying Parties has activities in the same market as the Rainbow
    Business or in a market which is up- or downstream from that of the Rainbow Business
    or in neighbouring markets closely related to this market.
18. In fact, the Rainbow Business, Centerbridge and Corsair perform different types of
    activities. The Rainbow Business is active in retail banking in the UK, while Corsair and
    Centerbridge are US based private equity firms, while links between the Rainbow
    Business and RBSG exists pre-merger. Furthermore, the Rainbow Business only
    represents a small part of the Notifying Parties' portfolio, so that coordination between
    independent undertakings that restricts competition within the meaning of Article 101(1)
    of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") is highly unlikely.
19. The present assessment under the Merger Regulation in no way prejudices the on-going
    monitoring of RBSG' implementation of its obligation in line with the above mentioned
    Decision of 14 December 2009.
V. CONCLUSION
20. For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    Transaction and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
                                                       For the Commission
                                                       (signed)
                                                       Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                       Vice-President
                                                   3
