                              EUROPEAN COMMISSION
In the published version of this decision, some                 Brussels, 10.4.2014
information has been omitted pursuant to Article                C(2014) 2560 final
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004                             PUBLIC VERSION
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information                        MERGER PROCEDURE
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
  To the notifying party:
  Dear Sir/Madam,
  Subject:       Case M.7151 - BNP PARIBAS/ Certain Assets of Royal Bank of Scotland
                 Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                 No 139/20041
  (1)       On 6 March 2014 the Commission received a notification of a proposed
            concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which BNP
            Paribas S.A. ("BNPP", France), hereafter "the notifying party" acquires within the
            meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation sole control of certain assets
            ("Target Business") of The Royal Bank of Scotland Plc. and The Royal Bank of
            Scotland N.V. (together "RBS", the United Kingdom) by way of purchase of
            assets, hereafter "the proposed transaction". BNPP and the Target Business are
            jointly referred to as "the Parties".
  1.        THE PARTIES
  (2)       BNPP is active in the field of retail banking services and corporate and investment
            banking worldwide. Its subsidiary BNP Paribas Arbitrage Issuance BV, directly
            concerned by the transaction, is an entity of BNPP located in the Netherlands,
            specialised in the issuing of securities, such as warrants, certificates, notes and
            other financial products, issued under a guarantee of BNPP.
  (3)       RBS operates retail and commercial businesses with a focus on the UK, Republic
            of Ireland and the United States. Its core business segments include personal
            banking and corporate banking in the UK and retail and commercial banking in the
            United States. RBS’ investment banking, wealth management and payments
  1       OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ('the Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
          the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
          replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
          the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
  Office for Publications of the European Union
  L-2985 Luxembourg

        network have a wider international presence across Europe, the Middle East, the
        Americas and Asia.
(4)     The Target Business consists in (i) structured investment products and equity
        derivatives issued by RBS, along with the economic risks and rewards of payments
        and delivery flows of these products, (ii) financial instruments held by RBS for the
        purpose of hedging the risks associated with these products and (iii) contracts, staff
        composed by front office professionals necessary to ensure the continuity of the
        business, IP rights, proprietary software and proprietary indices information, all
        related to the assets mentioned previously. Therefore, the transferred assets
        constitute a business with market presence within the meaning of paragraph 24 of
        the Commission Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice under the Merger Regulation.2
2.      THE CONCENTRATION
(5)     On 19 February 2014, the Parties signed a Transaction Framework Agreement
        based on which BNPP will acquire the Target Business as described above.
        Therefore, the proposed transaction constitutes a concentration by way of
        acquisition of assets, within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
        Regulation.
3.      EU DIMENSION
(6)     The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
        more than EUR 5 000 million3 (BNPP: EUR […] million, the Target Business:
        EUR […] million). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR
        […] million (BNPP: EUR […], the Target Business: EUR 446 million) but they do
        not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one
        and the same Member State.
(7)     Therefore, the proposed transaction has an EU dimension, within the meaning of
        Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
4.      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
(8)     The Parties’ activities overlap on the market for the sale and trading of equity
        derivatives in the EEA, namely in the segments of flow equity derivatives, equity
        financing and corporate derivatives. They also overlap on the market for structuring,
        issuing and market making of structured investment products, in its sub-segments
        namely (i) exchange traded structured investment products ("ETSIP") in Germany,
        Italy, Finland, Norway, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Sweden and (ii) wholesale
        structured investment products in the EEA.
4.1.    Equity derivatives
4.1.1.   Product market definition
(9)     Derivatives are financial contracts deriving their value from another asset (called
        "the underlying"), which could for instance be a commodity, equity or fixed
        income instrument or an equity index. The Commission previously analysed the
        market for trading and clearing of exchange traded derivatives performed by the
        exchanges, which offer trading platforms and clearing houses. The Commission
        considered that this market could be subdivided by (i) type of contract, (ii)
2      OJ C 95, 16.04.2008, p.1.
3      Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
       Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p1).
                                                       2

      underling asset class such as equities, equity indices, option, swaps or (iii) the
      execution environment (Over-the-Counter ("OTC"), or on exchange).4 However,
      the proposed transaction does not relate to the trading and clearing activity as
      defined in these previous cases, since the Parties’ activities overlap only in OTC
      sales and trading of equity derivatives, thus the previous analysis of the
      Commission is not fully applicable to the case at hand.
(10)  The notifying party submits that the market for equity derivatives could be
      segmented into (i) flow equity derivatives, (ii) equity financing, and (iii) corporate
      derivatives, as these products are not substitutable.
(11)  The market investigation largely confirmed that the market for equity derivatives
      could be subdivided in the proposed manner,5 therefore, the product market for
      equity derivatives will be analysed accordingly for the purpose of the present case.
      Nevertheless, the precise scope of the product market definition can ultimately be
      left open, given that no competition concerns arise under any plausible market
      definition.
      4.1.1.1. Flow Equity Derivatives
(12)  The notifying party submits that flow equity derivatives, also referred to as "vanilla
      equity derivatives" are standard products (as opposed to "exotic equity derivatives",
      which are more complex, bespoke products) comprising options, swaps and futures on
      a single stock (single stock derivative) or on an index of stocks (index derivative).
      Flow equity derivatives are offered to financial institutions (e.g., asset managers,
      pension funds, banks, insurance companies) and can be listed or OTC traded.
      However, the distinction between OTC and exchange traded Flow Equity Derivatives
      is not necessary for the purpose of the present case, since only OTC traded products
      are concerned.
(13)  The notifying party submits that the question of sub-segmentation of flow equity
      derivatives according to the type of the contract (i.e. between swaps, options and
      futures or forwards) or according to the underlying asset class may be left open.
(14)  In this respect, the results of the market investigation are inconclusive. Some
      market participants suggest that it might be appropriate to further subdivide the
      market for flow equity derivatives, in particular based on the underlying asset class,
      for example equity, commodity, interest rate etc., but not based on the type of
      contract (swaps, options and future derivatives products). One third of the
      respondents consider that any subdivision would not be appropriate.6
(15)  Ultimately, the question whether the market for flow equity should be further
      subdivided can be left open for the purpose of the present case, given that no
      competition concerns arise under any plausible market definition.
      4.1.1.2. Equity financing
(16)  Equity financing activities comprise stock lending and borrowing activities ("SLAB")
      operated for both hedge funds and financial institutions offered both on an exchange
      and OTC. The notifying party considers that prime brokerage services, which consist
      in offering integrated services to the client, should be included in the equity financing
4    Case No COMP/M.6166 - Deutsche Börse / Nyse Euronext, recital 254, case M. Case No
     COMP/M.6873 - INTERCONTINENTAL EXCHANGE / NYSE EURONEXT, recitals 18-21.
5    Replies to question 21 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
6    Replies to questions 22 and 22.1 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                    3

        activities, though it is not relevant for the assessment of the proposed transaction. The
        equity financing relevant for the case at hand is performed OTC only.
(17)    The Commission has so far not analysed the market for equity financing. However the
        precise market definition can be left open for the purpose of the present case, given
        that no competition concerns arise under any plausible market definition.
        4.1.1.3. Corporate Derivatives / Strategic Equity
(18)    Corporate derivatives also referred to as "strategic equity", comprise hedging or
        financing activities of equity participations of corporate clients. These activities
        have large size and long maturities and are OTC traded.
(19)    Instruments used include options (for client hedging purposes) and financing of
        equity participations. The portfolio of assets concerned by the transaction only
        includes financing instruments.
(20)    Previously, the Commission has examined cases dealing with various private
        equity segments (in its widest sense, as equity investments in unquoted
        companies), the supply of funds comprising equity and debt finance,7 lending
        services,8 securities lending,9 Initial Public Offering advisory services and equity
        and debt underwriting,10 and asset management services.
4.1.2.  Geographic market definition
(21)    The Commission has previously considered that the market for trading and clearing
        of equity index derivatives could be considered as global.11 The Commission also
        noted that derivatives markets may be viewed as global in the sense that customers
        are located all around the world, however the question whether the market is global
        or EEA wide has been left open.12 As far as the geographical scope of the markets
        of various private equity segments is concerned (as mentioned in recital (20)
        above), the Commission considered an EEA-wide or global dimension, without
        concluding on the exact definition.
(22)    The notifying party submits that that the market for equity derivatives and its
        respective sub-segments is at least EEA in scope. The notifying party claims that
        suppliers of equity derivatives are international banks operating essentially from
        financial hubs such as New York, London and Hong Kong. In the EEA suppliers
        operate either from London exclusively, or from London and a local historical hub.
        Similarly, the customers, which are mainly financial institutions, operate from the
        same places. The notifying party notes that some banks may have small local sales
        teams, but the structuring, pricing and trading of the products is generally
        performed in London or in the local historical hub, however as regards the equity
        derivatives related to the proposed transaction, equity derivatives are only issued in
        London, to clients based in the EEA.
(23)    The market investigation confirmed that the market for equity derivatives and its
        respective sub-segments should be considered as EEA–wide or as global (as
7      Case No COMP/M.2577 – GE Capital / Heller recital 15.
8      Case No COMP/M.2577 – GE Capital / Heller rectial 16.
9      Case No COMP/M.3511 – Wiener Boerse et al/Budapest Stock Exchange/Budapest Commodity
       Exchange / KELER / JV rectial 14.
10     Case No COMP/M.2158 – Credit Suisse Group / Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette recital 7.
11     COMP/M.6873 – INTERCONTINENTAL EXCHANGE / NYSE EURONEXT, recital 75.
12     No COMP/M.6166 - Deutsche Börse / Nyse Euronext, recital 452.
                                                     4

        indicated by approximately two thirds of the respondents). Only a minority of
        market participants suggested that the segments of flow equity derivatives and of
        corporate derivatives could be considered as national in scope due to, e.g.,
        customer purchasing patterns.13
(24)    In view of the fact that the majority of market participants confirmed that the
        market should be considered as EEA-wide or global, and that as regards the
        proposed transaction all the equity derivatives are issued in London for clients in
        the EEA, for the purpose of the present case, the geographic market for equity
        derivatives and its respective sub-segments can be considered as wider than
        national. Nevertheless, the precise scope of the geographic market definition,
        whether EEA wide or global, can be left open, given that no competition concerns
        arise under the alterative geographic market definitions.
4.2.    Structured Investment products
4.2.1.  Product market definition
(25)    Structured products are securities that can be issued – as stock and other equities
        listed and traded on exchanges. They are based on an underlying such as an index,
        a company-issued equity, a currency or a commodity and they are issued by banks,
        offer a return which is fixed at issuance and are often designed for local (retail)
        investors.
(26)    The Commission has previously analysed the market for listing of structured
        investment products, in the context of a broader category of listing of cash
        instruments: equities and bonds. The Commission considered that there are three
        equity categories (i) company-issued equity, (ii) exchange traded products
        (comprising Exchange Traded Funds, Exchange Traded Commodities and
        Vehicles), (iii) and structured products (including warrants and certificates), each
        of which should be regarded as a separate product market.14
(27)    In previous cases, the Commission has also considered that there is a separate
        market for equity trading on regulated markets (exchanges) and OTC trading. The
        Commission noted that the decision for OTC appeared to be determined by factors
        such as the size of the deal, specific client requirements and liquidity
        considerations.15
(28)    The notifying party defines activities concerned in the present transaction as
        structuring, issuance and market making of structured derivatives based on one or
        more underlying asset classes such as equity, commodities and fixed income.
(29)    Structuring of financial products consists in designing tailor made products for
        customers. The design involves choosing or building an underlying (e.g. a basket
        of stocks, a custom-made index, a combination of stocks, commodities, foreign
        exchange, interest rates products etc.), wrapping the product(s) in the adequate
        legal wrapper (e.g. insurance policy, collective investment scheme, fund, term
        deposit etc.) and testing the behaviour of the product on historical data.
13     Replies to questions 23 to 23.3 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
14     Case No COMP/M.6166 - Deutsche Börse / Nyse Euronext, recitals 28-30, 67-69.
15     Case No COMP/M.6166 - Deutsche Börse / Nyse Euronext, recitals 63-64.
                                                      5

(30)  Market making consists in selling and buying from clients and making profit on
      price differentials. Market making is done by brokers/dealers that accept the risk of
      holding certain number of financial instruments in order to facilitate their trading.
(31)  The notifying party agrees with the previous assessment of the Commission that
      structured investment products should be regarded as a distinct category of
      products alongside cash equities, bonds or equity derivatives. Furthermore, the
      notifying party also agrees that the market for structured investment products could
      be further segmented into (i) exchange traded structured investment products
      (hereinafter "ETSIP") and (ii) wholesale structured investment products, offered
      OTC.
(32)  The market investigation largely confirmed that the market can be segmented at (i)
      ETSIP comprising products listed and traded on exchange, including notes,
      warrants and certificates and (ii) Wholesale Structured Products, traded over the
      counter.16
(33)  For the purpose of the assessment of the present case the market would be
      segmented at ETSIP and wholesale structured product, nevertheless, the precise
      product market definition can be left open, since it is unlikely that the proposed
      transaction would give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
      internal market under any alternative market definition.
      4.2.1.1. ETSIP
(34)  The category of ETSIP includes listed structured products, notes, and certificates
      and exchanged traded funds. They are issued by product issuers such as the Parties.
      These products are standardized across the range of providers which allows them to
      be listed on exchanges, where they are made accessible, along with stocks, bonds,
      futures, etc. to retail clients and financial institutions.
(35)  The notifying party considers that stocks, bonds, and listed equity derivatives do
      not belong to the same market as ETSIP, since there is limited substitutability
      between them. The notifying party submits that the relevant market ought to be
      limited to ETSIP, including warrants and certificates.
(36)  The notifying party submits that providers advertise their products through four
      main channels (i) brokers, (ii) mailing lists of retail and institutional investors, (iii)
      media (including the press), and (iv) proprietary websites. Retail customers
      purchase and sell ETSIP via brokers, generally independent from the issuer.
(37)  The notifying party argues that the ETSIP should not be subdivided according to
      the underlying products (equities, commodities, fixed income), and referred to
      several reason pointing against this segmentation. First, clients choose between
      various ETSIP with various underlying depending on the yield target and pay-out
      characteristics (in accordance with their risk appetite) and the selection does not
      focus on the underlying asset class. Second, many ETSIP combine several asset
      classes as underlying (so it would be difficult to distinguish segments for those
      ETSIP). Finally, in general, ETSIP have homogenous pay-out and wrapper
      characteristics irrespective of the underlying. These characteristics make ETSIP
      with different underlyings perfectly comparable and interchangeable from the
      demand side perspective.
16   Replies to question 6 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                   6

(38)  The notifying party argues that for similar reasons ETSIP should not be subdivided
      according to the type, e.g. investment products or leverage products, since in fact,
      clients often combine various products and also change their choices depending to
      their risk appetite in a given moment.
(39)  The market investigation revealed a degree of supply side substitutability between
      the structured exchanges traded products and stocks, bonds, and listed equity
      derivatives.17 Nevertheless, the market investigation also revealed that structured
      products are legally debt products and cannot seamlessly replace equity products
      like stocks. Competitors also pointed out that the issuance and listing of exchange
      traded derivatives such as warrants and certificates require less administration
      compared to the listing of company's shares or bonds on a stock exchange. Further,
      warrants and options could be considered as financially equivalent, nevertheless
      the ETSIP are designed for retail customers while listed equity derivatives are
      rather dedicated to professionals. Lastly, ETSIP imply different type and risk when
      compared to stock, bonds and listed equity derivatives.18
(40)  From the demand side, the market investigation revealed limited substitutability
      between the ETSIP and stocks, bonds, and listed equity derivatives.19 Market
      participants indicate that the levels of return and risk are very different for an
      investment in stocks or bonds compared to listed equity derivatives for which the
      risks and complexity are higher. It is difficult for a customer to replicate the market
      exposure and pay-off structures with other financial instruments. Therefore, on
      balance, the market investigation confirmed the line proposed by the notifying
      party, i.e. that the ETSIP could be considered as a separate market excluding
      stocks, bonds, and listed equity derivatives.
(41)  In addition, the market investigation largely confirmed that a market for ETSIP
      should not be further segmented based on the different underling asset classes
      (equities, commodities, fixed income).20
(42)  Lastly, some competitors identified a separate market segment for "mini futures"
      products within the market for ETSIP.21 Mini-futures are a type of leverage product
      a category which comprises (i) leverage products without knock-out (warrants and
      spread warrants), leverage products with knock-out (knock out warrants, mini-
      futures and double knock-out warrants) and constant leverage (constant leverage
      certificates). The market investigation, however, made clear that both from the
      demand-side and the supply-side it would not be justified to consider mini-futures
      as a separate market segment: customers switch easily, and it is largely the
      marketing choice of suppliers whether they focus on this segment or not. In
      particular, the mini-futures have similar characteristics to knock-out warrants and
      double knock-out warrants and any provider of ETSIP can easily provide also the
      mini-futures products.
(43)  In view of the findings of the market investigation, the Commission considers that for
      the purpose of the present case the narrowest product market definition encompasses
      all structured ETSIP.
17   Replies 7 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
18   Replies to question 7.1 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
19   Replies to question 8.1 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
20   Replies to questions 9 and 10 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
21   Replies to questions 15.1 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                    7

        4.2.1.2. Wholesale Structured Investment Products
(44)    Wholesale structured investment products are traded OTC, issued by financial
        institutions and sold to another financial institution to address their needs (such as
        hedging, investment or balance sheet management) or for them to distribute them
        to their clients or as a hedge related to structured products distributed to their
        clients.
(45)    Wholesale structured investment products are generally based on one underlying
        asset class (e.g., equities, commodities, fixed income), but can also include a
        combination of different asset classes ("hybrid structured products"). They can be
        sold using various legal forms or "wrappers", such as notes / certificates, OTC
        instruments covered by standard International Swaps and Derivatives Association's
        contracts, structured deposits, funds and collective investment schemes or
        insurance policies.
(46)    The notifying party submits that the market for wholesale structured investment
        products should not be further segmented.
(47)    The market investigation confirmed that a further segmentation of the wholesale
        structured investment products based on the underlying asset class (equities,
        commodities, fixed income) is not appropriate. Competitors point out that from the
        supply side, issuers can rather easily adapt the classes of underlying assets
        according to the demands of investors. Further, some products are multi-asset and
        the diversification would not be accurately reflected under a segmentation based on
        the underlying asset classes.22
(48)    Consequently, in view of the result of the market investigation the Commission
        considers that for the purpose of the assessment of the present transaction as
        regards the structured products the narrowest relevant product market encompasses
        all wholesale structured investment products.
4.2.2.   Geographic market definition
        4.2.2.1. ETSIP
(49)    The Commission has previously considered that the market for trading of
        structured products is likely to be national in scope, since they are designed for
        specific customer needs that vary from Member State to Member State. Therefore,
        the Commission considered that structured products listed in a particular country
        are specifically designed for domestic investors and do not seem to attract other
        investors.23
(50)    The notifying party submits that the market should be deemed to be EEA-wide
        from a supply-side perspective, while it may be considered as national from a
        demand-side perspective.
(51)    Regarding the supply side, the notifying party submits that there are no legal or
        regulatory barriers to entry preventing international banks from issuing ETSIP
        throughout the EEA. Consequently, the ETSIP suppliers are either international
        banks with a significant investment banking division using their economy of scale
        or local banks with a large retail network.
(52)    From the demand side, ETSIP are designed for retail clients (albeit are bought also
        by financial institutions) and customers have very low or no barriers to buy ETSIP
22     Replies to questions 11 and 11.1 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
23     Case No COMP/M.6166 - Deutsche Börse / Nyse Euronext, recital 77.
                                                      8

      from any exchange in the EEA. The notifying party admits, however, that some
      retail clients buy the products on the national markets since they are tailored to
      local clients' need.
(53)  In view of these considerations, the narrowest geographical market for the
      issuance, structuring and market making of ETSIP would be national in scope. The
      market investigations confirmed that market should be considered as national in
      scope since the competition between suppliers takes place at the national level.24
      4.2.2.2. Wholesale Structured Investment Products
(54)  The Commission has not previously analysed the geographic market for structured
      products offered OTC, i.e. for the wholesale structured investment products.
(55)  The notifying party submits that the market for wholesale structured products is
      EEA in scope. In fact in, general these products are offered by international banks
      operating from New York, London and Hong Kong. In Europe, suppliers operate
      either from London exclusively, or from London and a local historical hub. The
      legal documentation of most wholesale structured products is drafted in English
      and is governed by English law, and each product is sold in one or many European
      Member States. The EU regulation in the field of financial services, namely the
      Prospectus Directive and the Directive relative to Undertakings for Collective
      Investments in Transferable Securities (the "UCITS Directive"), allows the issuers
      to structure the product in one Member State under an issuance program approved
      by a national regulator and to passport it to another Member States for subsequent
      distribution to the public.
(56)  From the demand side, in the EEA customers purchase wholesale structured
      products mainly in London. Clients may ask suppliers to structure the product to
      address national preferences such as national currency, local underling stocks etc.,
      nevertheless the structuring, pricing and trading is generally performed in London
      or in the local historical hub.
(57)  With respect to the proposed transaction, the wholesale structured products are
      only issued from London, to clients based in Europe. Consequently, the Parties
      consider that the market for wholesale structured investment products is EEA in
      scope.
(58)  The market investigation was inconclusive regarding the level at which
      competition between suppliers of wholesale structured products takes place, but the
      majority of the respondents indicated that the market should be consider as EEA
      wide or global in scope.25
(59)  In view of the results of the market investigation and the fact that as regards the
      proposed transaction is concerned all the wholesale structured investment products
      are issued from London to customers in the EEA, it can be considered that the
      market is at least EEA-wide. However, the precise geographic market definition as
      regards the wholesale structured products can be left open, since the proposed
      transaction is unlikely to give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
      internal market under any alternative geographic market definition.
24   Replies to question 12 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
25   Replies to question 13 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                   9

4.3.    Competitive assessment
4.3.1.  Equity derivatives
(60)    The proposed transaction leads to limited horizontal overlaps regarding the equity
        derivatives market and its respective sub-segment, which do not result in any
        affected markets, since the combined market shares of the Parties would not exceed
        20%.
(61)    On the market for flow equity derivatives, the Parties’ combined market share in
        the EEA amounts to around [10-20]% with an increment of [0-5]% for the Target
        Business. Thus, the transaction does not give rise to serious doubts regarding its
        compatibility with the internal market. The same conclusion can be reached
        regarding the segments for equity financing and corporate derivatives where the
        combined markets shares are well below [20-30]%: below [0-5]% and below [0-
        5]% respectively. The Parties’ combined market shares will be even lower if the
        market is considered to be global in scope.
(62)    Furthermore, the notifying party notes that market share data is in this case very
        conservative. First, the revenues generated by the Target Business will not replicate
        in BNPP post-transaction due to expected clients attrition and the impossibility to
        transfer for some revenues. Second, since these are instruments traded OTC there is
        limited availability of accurate and complete data on the size of the market for
        equity derivatives, and, thus, the data is based on revenues generated in Europe by
        top 10 capital market players, which are estimated to account for approximately
        79% of the market. Should the data be based on the total market volume, the
        Parties’ shares would be even lower.
(63)    The market investigation confirmed that the Parties are not particularly close
        competitors in the market for equity derivatives and the market is composed by
        several other players among which Commerzbank, Deutsche Bank and Société
        Générale.26 Furthermore, the merger will not remove a particular important
        competition source, since vast majority of the respondents do not consider RBS as
        an aggressive competitor.27 The market investigation indicated that the transaction
        will not have material impact or will have very limited impact on this market
        segment.28
(64)    Based on these arguments, the Commission considers that the proposed transaction
        does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market.
4.3.2.           Structured investment products
        4.3.2.1. ETSIP
(65)    The proposed transaction leads to affected markets in the Netherlands and in
        Sweden.
(66)    In the Netherlands the combined market share amounts to [40-50]%; however there
        is very limited increment, since BNPP had a market share of [0-5]% in 2012 and
        [0-5]% in 2013. Thus, the proposed transaction does not raise competition concerns
        as regards ETSIP in the Netherlands.
26     Replies to question 24-24.3 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
27     Replies to question 25 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
28     Replies to question 26.3 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                     10

(67)     In Sweden the Parties’ combined market share in 2013 amounts to [30-40]% with
         an increment of [10-20]% for the Target Business. The combined market share is
         lower, [10-20]%, with an increment of [10-20]% for the Target Business if viewed
         as an average of the last five years, in order to discount for the volatility of market
         shares (see Table 1 below). Post transaction, BNPP will be the market leader;
         however it will continue to face competition in Sweden from Commerzbank ([20-
         30]% market share in 2013), Handelsbanken ([5-10]%) and Société Générale which
         has also entered this market recently and gained market share of [5-10]% in 2013.
(68)     The notifying party notes that, similarly to the case of equity derivatives, the
         theoretical combined market shares on the ETSIP market provide a very
         conservative view, since the revenues of the Target Business will not be simply
         replicable within BNPP post-transaction.
(69)     Furthermore, the notifying party emphasises very high market shares volatility in
         the Swedish market for ETSIP issuance, structuring and market making. In fact, the
         data provided by the notifying party shows that BNPP market share has increased
         from [5-10]% in 2012 to [20-30]% in 2013 (see Table 1 below). The notifying
         party explains this rapid expansion of its market share by the success of a new
         product launched in Sweden which addressed clients’ demand that previously had
         not been identified. The significant increase in the market share indicates that
         customers can switch easily their issuers of ETSIP, and that the market is highly
         contestable. This is further illustrated by the fact that, Commerzbank, the market
         leader, had a market share of [30-40]% in 2012 which dropped significantly to [20-
         30]% in 2013. The same observation can be made regarding the local bank
         Handelsbanken which had market share of [20-30]% in 2012 and [5-10]% in 2013.
         Market share data for the past 10 years indicates that high volatility is a structural
         characteristic of the market.
Table 1. Market shares of BNPP and the Target Business in ETSIP in Sweden over the last
         five years:
      Sweden         2009         2010        2011        2012        2013      Average 2009-2013
       BNPP         [0-5]%     [0-5]%        [0-5]%      [0-5]%      [20-30]             [5-10]
        RBS       [5-10]%      [5-10]%     [10-20]%    [10-20]%     [10-20]%           [10-20]%
(70)      The notifying party considers that the Parties’ combined market share should be
         viewed as a snapshot of the ETSIP market in Sweden in a given point in time and
         should not be considered as a reliable description of the weight of the Parties on
         this market.
(71)     The notifying party further emphasised that customers are self-advised retail clients
         who purchase products on the exchange in accordance with their investment
         strategy, showing little loyalty to a specific product provider and typically holding
         portfolios of products from different ETSIP issuers.
(72)     The market investigation revealed that the majority of the respondents perceived
         the Parties as close competitors on the market for ETSIP in Sweden. However, the
         majority of the respondents consider that an issuer active in one of the sub-
         segments of structured investment products in Sweden, can easily start offering
                                                   11

      structured investment products in another segments without incurring significant
      costs or facing other barriers.29 Furthermore the market investigation confirmed
      that the ETSIP market is highly volatile: BNPP and Société Générale are the recent
      new entrants in this market and already gained high market shares; respondents
      also explained that all major European and American players are present in Sweden
      in the market of ETSIP.30 Overall, companies who are interested in entering this
      market would face low entry barriers, consisting mainly in regulatory requirements
      or good knowledge of the local demand.31 Ultimately, the respondents unanimously
      indicate that the market for ETSIP in Sweden will remain competitive following
      the transaction.32
(73)  In general as regards the market for ETSIP, the Parties’ combined market shares
      will be lower if the market is considered to be EEA-wide or global in scope.
(74)  Based on the above, it can be concluded that, the proposed transaction does not
      give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market regarding
      the market for ETSIP in Sweden.
      4.3.2.2. Wholesales Structured Investment Products
(75)  Regarding the market for wholesale structured products, the Parties' combined
      market share in the EEA will amount to [10-20]% of the revenues generated in
      Europe by the top 10 capital market players, with an increment of [0-5]% for
      BNPP. Since the combined market share is well below [20-30]%, the proposed
      transaction does not result in an affected market. The Parties’ combined market
      shares will be even lower if the market is considered to be global in scope.
(76)  In light of the above, the proposed transaction does not give rise to serious doubts
      as regards the market for Wholesale Structured Investment Products.
5.    CONCLUSION
(77)  For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
      notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with
      the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of
      the Merger Regulation.
                                                         For the Commission
                                                         (Signed)
                                                         Andris PIEBALGS
                                                         Member of the Commission
29   Replies to questions 16 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
30   Replies to questions 18 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
31   Replies to questions 19 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
32   Replies to questions 20 of Q-1 M.7151 BNP Paribas / RBS - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                   12
