4.  According to a sales contract signed by the notifying parties and the present shareholders of
    MMTG, these shareholders cede the majority of their shares to BHF and CCF. CCF will
    acquire its shares in the joint venture through its 100% subsidiary Société Financière et
    Mobilière. The resulting distribution of shares and the decision mechanisms will be such,
    that BHF and CCF acquire joint control of MMTG (see below). MMTG will afterwards be
    renamed BHF & CCF Leasing GmbH.
II. THE CONCENTRATION
A.  Joint Control
5.  After the majority of shares has been sold to BHF and CCF and after an increase in capital,
    the share capital of BHF & CCF Leasing GmbH will be held as follows:
    - BHF                                                 30%
    - CCF                                                 30%
    - private shareholder 1                               11%
    - private shareholder 2                               11%
    - private shareholder 3                               9 %
    - private shareholder 4                               9%
6.  The draft articles of association (Gesellschaftsvertrag) of BHF & CCF Leasing GmbH,
    being part of the submitted notification, stipulate that decisions can only be taken if 75% of
    share capital is present, i.e. BHFs' and CCFs' presence is always necessary.
7.  According to the above-mentioned articles of association the shareholders take decisions
    with a majority of 75% of votes, except the decision to dissolve the company, which is
    taken with a simple majority of votes. The 75%-quorum confers a veto right to BHF and
    CCF. According to a regulation concerning the organisation of the joint venture
    (Geschäftsordnung), being part of the submitted notification, the shareholders have to
    decide - among others - on the following:
    -     questions of structure, organisation and strategy of the business
    -     middle- and long-term business plan
    -     budget
    -     leasing contracts, where the cost of the leasing object exceeds five times the share
          capital of the joint venture
    -     investments above 100'000 DM (German Marks), if not budgeted
    -     appointment of senior management
8.  The distributions of shares and the decision mechanisms are such, that BHF and CCF are
    able to veto strategic decisions, but they do not have the power, each on their own or
    together, to impose such decisions. But because CCF and BHF each can produce a deadlock
    situation they acquire decisive influence and will therefore jointly control BHF & CCF
    Leasing GmbH in the sense of Article 3(3) of the Merger Regulation.
B.  Full Function
9.  BHF & CCF Leasing GmbH is a start-up company destined to operate in a specific segment
    of the leasing sector. An important part of its business activity will consist in the
                                                 2

     consultancy in and the conception of solutions for financing big-volume investments (see
     above). In some cases the joint venture will also be lessor, but in each such case it will
     refinance such deals by reselling the income resulting from the lease contract to a bank or
     other finance institution.
10. For these reasons, also a share capital of one million German marks will be sufficient to
     carry out the business of the joint venture. The joint venture will have sufficient staff and
     assets to perform the functions normally carried out by other undertakings operating in the
     same market and - according to the articles of association -it is intended to operate on a
     lasting basis.
C.   Absence of Scope of Coordination of Competitive Behaviour
11. BHF is not operating in the same market where the joint venture will be active and has
     therefore no relevant know-how. According to a draft shareholder agreement, being part of
     the submitted notification, BHF and CCF will not engage in new business in the specific
     leasing segment in Germany, where the joint venture will operate. The same agreement
     provides that whenever the banks would have to acquire such leasing business in Germany
     in the future, they will assign it to the joint venture.
12. It could be said that BHF and CCF are active in neighbouring markets - banking markets -
     of the one the joint venture will be active. Although these neighbouring markets are of
     significant economic importance compared with that of the joint venture, a coordination of
     the competitive behaviour of the mother companies can realistically be excluded, because
     BHF and CCF operate mainly in different geographic markets.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
13. The operation has a Community dimension as specified in Article 1 (2) of the Merger
     Regulation. Calculated in accordance with Article 5(3)(a) of the Merger Regulation, the
     undertakings concerned have an aggregate worldwide turnover of more than Ecu 6.5 billion
     (BHF: Ecu 2.29 billion, CCF: Ecu 4.34 billion), which is above the Ecu 5 billion requested
     in the Merger Regulation. BHF and CCF do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
     aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
A.   Relevant Product Market
14. As mentioned above, BHF & CCF Leasing GmbH will offer financial consultancy services
     related to higher volume investment leasing and fund leasing (a leasing fund is a limited
     partnership with the purpose of financing capital goods through private investors). This
     service will be offered on a fee basis in connection with leasing contracts and fund leasing.
     The joint venture will also act as a lessor. Therefore the parties submit that the relevant
     product market is the leasing market excluding real estate and consumer goods (cars,
     furniture etc.) leasing.
15. It is necessary to assess whether the method of financing these goods is relevant (see
     IV/M.664 GRS Holding and IV/M.669 Charterhouse/Porterbrook). A potential operator of
     goods that necessitate a high investment will consider all kinds of possible solutions in
                                                     3

    order to finance this investment. This will certainly include renting, leasing and outright
    purchase of these goods.
16. It is also conceivable that consultancy in and concept development of financing solutions
    for big-volume investments could be considered a separate market, because this service is
    not necessarily linked to the leasing, renting or selling operation. The assumption of a
    separate market for this service is strengthend by the fact that it will be offered on a fee
    basis and will therefore not be included in the rent or leasing cost.
17. However, for the purposes of this case, the question of whether the relevant product market
    includes all types of financing or only financing through leasing or if consultancy in
    solutions for financing investment goods is a separate product market can be left open as, on
    the basis of the assessment set out below, a dominant position would not be created or
    strengthened even on the narrowest definition of the product market.
B.  Relevant Geographic Market
18. According to its business plan, the joint venture will almost exclusively operate in Germany
    and its envisaged customers consist of BHFs' target customers. It is therefore the parties'
    opinion, that the relevant geographic market is Germany.
19. When defining the relevant geographic market, not only the conditions on the supply-side,
    but also those on the demand-side have to be considered. A potential operator of goods that
    necessitate a high investment, e.g. aeroplanes or trains, is willing to look for an optimal
    financing solution and competent consultants probably in all Europe, if not worldwide.
    Therefore the relevant geographic market is wider than Germany.
20. However, for the purposes of this case, the exact definition of the relevant geographic
    market can be left open, because a dominant position would not be created or strengthened
    even on the narrowest, but also on a wider definition of the geographic market.
C.  Competitive Assessment
21. As stated above, BHF and CCF Leasing GmbH is a start-up company, destined to operate in
    a specific segment of the leasing sector, that is, "big-ticket" leasing. It is being created out of
    MMTG, which is currently just a shell company with no activities in the leasing sector.
    Therefore no combination of market shares in the leasing sector can or will occur as a result
    of the current transaction.
22. No overlap between the operations of BHF and CCF will result through the concentration,
    because BHF is not active in the future business of the joint venture. BHF & CCF Leasing
    GmbH is a market entrant and the concentration will therefore not have anti-competitive
    effects, even if the relevant geographic market were considered to be Germany alone.
23. CCFs' subsidiary Loxxia is specialised in equipment and financial leasing operations,
    structured as a consulting business, similar to the field of activities the joint venture will be
    operating in. It might therefore be argued that CCF strengthens its position in the relevant
    market through the participation in the joint venture. However, CCFs actual market share on
    the Europeanwide market is below 1% and its main competitors - only in France and
                                                4

    Germany - are companies like BNP, Société Générale, Paribas, Crédit Lyonnais, Deutsche
    Leasing AG, KG Allgemeine Leasing AG and so on.
24. Consequently, the creation of the joint venture by BHF and CCF does not create or
    strengthen a dominant position in the common market.
V.  CONCLUSION
25. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation and
    to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
    No 4064/89.
                                                      For the Commission,
                                             5
