                                   EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                    Brussels, 29.4.2014
                                                                    C(2014) 2943 final
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are                        MERGER PROCEDURE
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
                                                                                Public Version
   To the notifying party:
   Dear Sir/Madam,
   Subject:        Case M.7204 – Rothesay Life / MetLife Assurance
                   Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                   No 139/20041
   (1) On 21 March 2014, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
        concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which Rothesay Life
        Limited ("Rothesay", the United Kingdom), acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b)
        of the Merger Regulation sole control of the whole MetLife Assurance Limited ("MAL",
        the United Kingdom), referred to as "the Parties", by way of purchase of shares2 ("the
        Transaction"). Rothesay is designated hereinafter as the "Notifying Party".
   1.          THE PARTIES
   (2) Rothesay is an insurance company offering de-risking solutions to Trustees and
        sponsoring employers of corporate Defined Benefit Pension Schemes (hereinafter
        "DBPS"). It offers Bulk Annuity contracts and Longevity Swaps in the United Kingdom.
   1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ('the Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
             the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
             replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
             the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
   2         Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 089, 28.03.2014 p. 8.
   Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
   Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
   Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

     Rothesay is owned, indirectly, 29.9% by Blackstone Group L.P, 38% by Goldman Sachs
     Group Inc, 25% by Cambourne and 7% by MassMutual.3
(3) MAL is an insurance company offering de-risking solutions to Trustees and sponsoring
     employers of corporate DBPS. MAL's business focuses mainly on Bulk Annuity
     contracts in the United Kingdom and Ireland, thus the company does not offer any
     Longevity Swaps. The entire issued share capital of MAL is currently owned by MetLife
     European Holdings LLC.
2.         THE OPERATION AND THE CONCENTRATION
(4) On 14 February 2014, Rothesay and MetLife European Holding LLC signed a Share
     Purchase Agreement based on which Rothesay acquires the entire share capital and thus
     sole control of MAL. Therefore the Transaction constitutes a concentration within the
     meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
3.         EU DIMENSION
(5) The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
     than EUR 5 000 million4 (Rothesay5: EUR […] million, MAL: EUR […] million). Each
     of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (Rothesay: EUR […]
     million, MAL: EUR […] million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
     aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified
     operation, therefore, has an EU dimension.
4.         COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
(6) Both Rothesay and MAL offer de-risking solutions for mitigating the risk inherent in
     the management of DBPS. Within this domain, Rothesay is active only in the UK where
     it offers Bulk Annuity contracts and Longevity Swaps. MAL offers only Bulk Annuity
     contracts in the UK and Ireland.
(7) The Transaction creates horizontal overlaps (resulting in affected markets) regarding the
     market for de-risking transactions, comprising Bulk Annuity contracts (which can be
     further segmented into Buy-in and Buy-out contracts) and Longevity Swaps.
4.1.       Market definition
(8) Pension schemes in the UK and Ireland are presided by a board of Trustees who are
     responsible for managing the assets and liabilities of the pension schemes. DBPS
     guarantee a certain retirement benefit linked to the employees' salary before retirement.6
3        The Commission authorised the acquisition of joint control by Goldman Sachs and Blackstone of
         Rothesay in case COMP/M.7044 — Blackstone/Goldman Sachs/Rothesay. Cambourne's stake in the
         share capital of Rothesay is not controlling, since its voting rights are limited regarding the adoption
         of strategic decisions.
4        Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation.
5        Including Blackstone's and Goldman Sachs' turnover.
6        For instance in DBPS the benefit can be defined as 66% of the employee's final salary upon retirement
         for the remainder of his or her life. The actual amount is defined upon retirement.
                                                            2

     In these schemes the risk is borne by the corporate sponsor (sponsoring employer) or
     Trustees managing the pension scheme.7
(9) DBPS involve inherent risks8 which the Trustees and their corporate sponsors may seek
     to decrease through de-risking transactions. As such, de-risking transactions are a type of
     insurance allowing the transfer of some or all of the risks inherent in to the pension
     scheme to a third party (the issuer9) mainly in two ways: through (i) Longevity Swaps,
     which consists in insuring or hedging the longevity risk (for example, policyholders
     living longer than expected) or (ii) Bulk Annuity contracts, which consists in transferring
     to the insurer the complete responsibility, and hence the entire risk, for meeting the
     benefit payments to the members of the scheme.
Table 1. Description of de-risking transactions
  De-risking            Type of risk insured       Responsibility towards the pension schemes members
  transactions
  Bulk      Annuity     All risks inherent to      Transfer to the insurer of the risk of not meeting benefit payments
  contracts             the pension scheme         to the member of the pension scheme
                        are covered
  Buy-in                A policy covering all      The insurer bears all risk and pays the benefit payments to the
                        risks for a single up-     members of the scheme, while the Trustee retains an
                        front premium              administrative role and the relationship with the members of the
                                                   scheme. The Trustee bears ultimately the liability for the benefit
                                                   payments and thus also bears the residual counterparty risk that
                                                   the insurer may not fulfil its obligations under the Buy-in
                                                   transaction. Buy-in transactions are held as an asset of the pension
                                                   scheme.
  Buy-out               A policy covering all      The relationship between the members of the scheme and the
                        risks for a single up-     Trustees is fully transferred to the insurer. The Trustees no longer
                        front premium              bear the liability for managing the pension scheme and meeting
                                                   the benefit payments to the members of the pension scheme.
  Longevity swaps       Risk      that      the    The Trustee retains control over the assets of the pension scheme
                        members live longer        and remains responsible for benefit payments to the members of
                        than expected              the pension scheme.
(10) In addition to de-risking transactions, the Trustees and their corporate sponsors can also
     mitigate the risk by using so called Alternative Trustee Options (hereinafter "ATOs").
7        In contrast, in Defined Contribution Pension Schemes ("DCPS") the pension plan sponsor (employer
         or Trustee) does not guarantee in advance any particular amount of retirement benefit payments. In
         these schemes the retirement payments are determined by the investment performance of the funds
         accumulated in the scheme. Thus the employee bears the underlying risk and therefore de-risking
         transactions are not relevant to DCPS.
8        The main types of risks carried by the corporate sponsor and the Trustees managing DBPS are: (i)
         investment risk (that an investment will underperform), (ii) inflation risk (that inflation will be higher
         than expected), (iii) interest rate risk (affecting the value of assets and pension scheme deficits), (iv)
         longevity risk (policyholders living longer than expected) and (v) demographic risk (the likelihood
         that upon death the member of a pension scheme leaves a spouse). Ultimately the risk consists in
         whether the DBPS will manage to meet the payment commitments it has undertaken and fixed in
         advance vis-a-vis its members.
9        The issuer is usually an insurance company.
                                                               3

    ATOs do not involve the transfer of risk to a third party but rather include activities such
    as changing the investment strategy of the pension scheme or improving the scheme-
    funding position, e.g. by increasing contributions from employees.
4.1.1.     Product market definition
(11) Based on the Notifying Party's submissions and the results of the market investigation,
    the Commission will examine, first, whether the market for de-risking activities includes
    ATOs, second, whether it is appropriate to subdivide the market for de-risking
    transactions in Bulk Annuity contracts and Longevity Swaps, and third, the possible
    further subdivision of Bulk Annuity contracts in Buy-in and Buy-out transactions.
(12) In a previous decision10 the Commission analysed the market for de-risking transactions
    by reference to the life insurance market and has left open the question whether de-
    risking transactions such as Buy-in, Buy-out and Longevity Swaps are part of an overall
    market for de-risking of DBPS.
         i. Whether the market for de-risking transactions includes ATOs
(13) The Notifying Party submits that de-risking transactions (that is, Bulk Annuity contracts
    and Longevity Swaps) are part of an overall market for de-risking of DBPS which cover
    also ATOs. The Notifying Party does not provide market data for a market comprising
    also ATOs as there are no objective data available to quantify ATOs. In any event, the
    Notifying Party submits that it is not necessary to decide whether ATOs form part of the
    relevant market for the purpose of assessing the proposed Transaction, as it would not
    significantly impede effective competition even if the market were defined more
    narrowly.
(14) The Commission considers that ATOs cannot be considered as part of the same relevant
    market as other de-risking transactions such as Bulk Annuity contracts and Longevity
    Swaps. Indeed, ATOs are actions undertaken by the Trustees to potentially mitigate the
    risk they incur, without however transferring the risk of the pension liabilities to a third
    party. Conversely, the main feature of de-risking transactions is exactly to transfer the
    risk from the pension fund managed by the Trustees to a third party.
(15) Therefore, there is no substitutability (neither supply, nor demand-side) between de-
    risking transactions and ATOs. Rather, Trustees are faced with the choice of either
    transferring the risk to a third party, in which case they will enter in Bulk Annuity
    Contracts or Longevity Swap, or not, in which case they will retain the risk and mitigate
    it to the best of their capacities.
(16) Consequently, Commission concludes that de-risking transactions such as Bulk Annuity
    contracts and Longevity Swaps do not form part of the same relevant market as ATOs.
10       Case No COMP/M.7044 – Blackstone/Cambourne/Goldman Sachs/Rothesay, para.18.
                                                  4

        ii. Market for de-risking transactions and segmentation between Bulk Annuity
             contracts and Longevity Swaps
(17) The Notifying Party submits that both Bulk Annuity contracts and Longevity Swaps
    address the same customer need, namely reducing the risks related to DBPS, and
    therefore it is appropriate to consider them as forming part of an overall market for de-
    risking transactions. However, the Notifying Party also admits that Longevity Swaps
    transfer a smaller risk element than Bulk Annuities. The Notifying Party further points
    out that there is an increasing trend in the market to offer hybrid solutions, whereby
    within the same transaction the customer would de-risk certain liabilities with a
    Longevity Swap and other liabilities with a Bulk Annuity contract.
(18) The information the Commission obtained from its market investigation militates in
    favour of the view that Bulk Annuity contracts and Longevity Swaps constitute distinct
    product markets. Competitors revealed that they do not necessarily offer both products
    and they are rather specialised in one of them.11 As to the demand side, the vast majority
    of the customers consider that Bulk Annuity contracts and Longevity Swaps have
    different products characteristics and cannot be regarded as substitutable products. In
    particular, while Bulk Annuity contracts transfer all risk to the issuer, Longevity Swaps
    transfer only the longevity risk. Moreover, Bulk Annuity contracts involve a transfer of
    the underlying assets of the scheme to the issuer while in Longevity Swaps asset remains
    in the scheme. Contrary to the Notifying Party's claim, almost no Trustee or Trustee
    consultant indicated that they used hybrid solutions involving both Longevity Swaps and
    Bulk Annuity contracts within the same transaction.12
(19) Consequently, the Commission considers that Bulk Annuity contracts and Longevity
    Swaps constitute separate product markets.
        iii. Possible segmentation of the market for Bulk Annuity Contracts at Buy-in and
             Buy-out transactions
(20) As regards a possible further subdivision of the market for Bulk Annuity contracts into
    Buy-in and Buy-out transactions, the Notifying Party considers that both types of
    transactions are fully substitutable from a supply side point of view. This is because for
    the insurers of de-risking transactions it is possible to enter into either transaction
    without any significant adjustment. The only difference for the insurer are the increased
    administration requirements that result from the direct relationship the insurer has with
    pension scheme members in case of a Buy-out transaction. The Notifying Party also
    points out that all providers of Bulk Annuity contracts are able to perform both Buy-in
    and Buy-out transactions and to its knowledge there was no provider in the past five
    years that performed Buy-in but no Buy-out transactions.
(21) The information the Commission obtained in the context of its market investigation
    indicated that Buy-in and Buy-out Bulk transactions have some distinctive features;
    nevertheless the overall result was inconclusive. Specifically, customers indicated that
    Buy-in and Buy out transactions are very similar regarding the management of assets.
    However, in Buy-in transactions the Trustees retain the overall liability and the
    obligation to administer the payments to the members of the scheme and Buy-in
11      Non-confidential reply to questions 5 and 6 of questionnaire M.7204 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
12      Non-confidential reply to questions 3 and 4 of questionnaire M.7204 - Questionnaire to Customers.
                                                          5

    transactions are held by the schemes as an asset. In contrast, Buy-out transactions fully
    transfer the risk on the issuer and discharge the Trustee of any liability.
(22) The vast majority of competitors consider that Buy-in and Buy-out transactions are
    substitutable. They also largely confirmed the Notifying Party's argument that insurers
    active in the field of Bulk Annuity contracts typically offer both Buy-in and Buy-out
    solutions to their customers.13 Some competitors indicated that Buy-out transactions
    tend to be more expensive, in some cases prohibitively more expensive. From the
    customers' point of view, the market investigation was inconclusive.14 Almost half of the
    customers responding to the market investigation indicated that they use both Buy-in and
    Buy-out transactions in order to decrease the risk exposure generated by the assets and
    liabilities of the pension scheme under their management.
(23) However, the precise scope of product market definition can be left open, since the
    Transaction does not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
    market under any alternative market definition.
4.1.2.    Geographic market definition
(24) The Notifying Party submits that the market for de-risking of DBPS has characteristics
    in common with the market for pension products and that relevant geographic market is
    therefore national in scope. The Notifying Party argues that insurance companies such as
    Rothesay and MAL and their competitors are subject to national regulation and are
    supervised by the national regulators in the EU countries, and specifically in the UK and
    Ireland. For this reason the Notifying Party does not believe that the UK and Ireland
    should be considered as a cluster but in any event submits market data also for the
    hypothetical cluster.
(25) The Commission has previously considered the markets for provision of pension
    products to be national in scope due to: i) the existence of national distribution channels,
    ii) different regulatory frameworks and fiscal regimes, and iii) different established
    brands. However, the Commission ultimately left open the exact geographic market
    definition.15
(26) The information obtained by the Commission during its market investigation supported
    the Notifying Party's view that the market for Bulk Annuity contracts (including its
    potential segments of Buy-in and Buy-out transactions) is national in scope, i.e. limited
    to the territory of the UK. Only one competitor indicated that a cluster comprising the
    UK and Ireland would be the appropriate geographic scope. A very large majority of the
    customers confirmed that they select their provider of Bulk Annuity contracts at national
    level.16 Customers emphasised the fact that pension scheme in the UK is country
    specific in terms of regulation and pension provision which leads to different product
    demands compared with Ireland or other Member States. Insurers providing Bulk
13      Non-confidential reply to questions 9 and 10 of questionnaire M.7204 – Questionnaire Competitors.
14      Non-confidential reply to questions 5 and 6 of questionnaire M.7204 - Questionnaire to Customers.
15      Case No COMP/M.6883 – Canada Life/Irish Life, para. 19; Case No COMP.M.6521 – Talanx
        International/Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance/Warta, para. 54; Case No COMP/M.4701 – Generali/PPF
        Insurance Business, para. 26.
16      Non-confidential reply to question 8 of questionnaire M.7204 - Questionnaire to Customers.
                                                          6

     Annuity contracts need to have the necessary approval to write pension business in the
     UK.
(27) Customers also underlined the need for local presence and expertise since the trustee
     needs to have confidence in the capability of the insurer to handle the contract in the
     context of the UK pension regulatory framework.
(28) Consequently, the Commission considers that the market for Bulk Annuity contracts
     (including its potential segments of Buy-in and Buy-out transactions) should be regarded
     as national in scope.
4.2.       Competitive assessment
(29) The Transaction creates horizontal overlaps in the market for Bulk Annuity contracts
     and its Buy-in and Buy-out segments give rise to affected markets in the UK. Parties'
     activities do not overlap with regard to Longevity Swaps.
4.2.1.     Overall market for Bulk Annuity contracts
(30) The Parties' combined market shares in the market for Bulk Annuity contracts in the UK
     amounted to [20-30]% in value in 2013 (with an increment of only [0-5]% brought by
     MAL). In this market the Parties face strong competition from the Pension Insurance
     Corporation (“PIC”) which had a market share of [50-60]% in value in 2013 (up from
     [30-40]% in 2012 and [10-20]% in 2011). The other players in the UK market for Bulk
     Annuity contracts are Legal & General ([10-20]%), Aviva ([5-10]%) and Prudential ([0-
     5]%).
  Table 2. Market share information for Bulk Annuity contracts (Buy-in and Buy-out) – UK.
     Year                 2010              2011                2012                2013
     Rothesay             [20-30]%          [10-20]%            [20-30]%            [20-30]%
     MAL                  [5-10]%           [10-20]%            [5-10]%             [0-5]%
     Combined             [30-40]%          [30-40]%            [20-30]%            [20-30]%
     Pension Insurance    [10-20]%          [10-20]%            [30-40]%            [50-60]%
     Corporation
     Legal & General      [10-20]%          [20-30]%            [20-30]%            [10-20]%
    Source: Hyman & Robertson.
(31) The available market data demonstrates high market share volatility in the market for
     Bulk Annuity contracts in the UK. The Notifying Party submits that the volatility is a
     result of the bidding nature of the market, the intense competition between issuers for
     every transaction and because winning even one bid for a large value contract can
                                                     7

    heavily influence the issuer's market share.17 Indeed, Rothesay concluded […] in 2010,
    […] in each of 2011 and 2012, and […] in 2013.
(32) The Notifying Party, further, points out that the dynamic nature of the market for Bulk
    Annuity contracts is also demonstrated by the recent evolution of PIC’s market share,
    which grew from [10-20]% in 2011 to approximately [50-60]% in 2013. Furthermore,
    the Notifying Party submits that entry barriers are low. Indeed, both Parties entered the
    market in 2007 and in 2012 there were two new entrants in the UK, namely Just
    Retirement and Partnership.
(33) In addition, the Notifying Party submits that the Parties are not close competitors since
    Rothesay focuses on high value transactions while MAL is active in smaller sized
    transactions.18 The Notifying Party, moreover, points out that MAL's market share has
    decreased in 2013 to only [0-5]% and thus does not present a significant constraint on
    Rothesay. The information obtained by the Commission in its market investigation
    indicated that indeed MAL has in practice almost exited the market given its
    uncompetitive prices and that in any event it is not active in the market for large Bulk
    Annuity contacts.
(34) The information the Commission obtained in the context of its market investigation
    largely confirmed the Notifying Party’s submissions. In fact, customers select their
    insurer following a tender procedure and approximately 15 to 20 tenders take place
    every year.19 In addition, Rothesay and MAL are not perceived as close competitors.
    Rothesay's closest competitor appears to be Legal & General. The acquisition of MAL
    does not remove a strong competitive source as it is not perceived by customers as being
    particularly aggressive or innovative competitor. Customers also confirmed that the
    market for Bulk Annuity contracts has been very dynamic over the last three years, as
    two companies, Partnership and Just Retirement, entered and other competitors,
    including Lucida, Credit Suisse and Paternoster, left the market. Lastly, customers were
    positive about the competitive impact of the Transaction and mentioned that there will
    remain a sufficient number of insurers, thereby providing customers with choice.20
(35) Certain competitors consider that the Transaction would reduce the number of players
    competing for smaller Bulk Annuity contracts (less than £300 million). However, they
    also confirmed that MAL has not been writing significant volumes of business recently
    and there is still a sufficient number of providers in the market.21
17      Based on the Hyman and Roberson Market Reports (http://www.hymans.co.uk/knowledge-
        centre/surveys-reports.aspx) Notifying Party indicates that in 2012 six deals accounted for nearly 50%
        of the total value of the market.
18      This is confirmed by the Hyman and Roberson Market Report Q4 2012 showing for instance that in
        2012 MAL concluded 18 Bulk Annuity transactions at an average value of £19m while Rothesay had
        three transactions at an average value of £342m. The different focus of the Parties in terms of value of
        transactions has also been confirmed by one of the respondents to the market investigation.
19      Non-confidential reply to questions 11 and 11.1 of questionnaire M.7204 - Questionnaire to
        Customers.
20      Non-confidential reply to questions 13-20 of questionnaire M.7204 - Questionnaire to Customers.
21      Non-confidential reply to question 19 of questionnaire M.7204 – Questionnaire Competitors.
                                                          8

(36) Consequently, it can be concluded that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as
    to its compatibility with the internal market in the overall market for Bulk Annuity
    contracts in the UK.
4.2.2.    Buy-in and Buy-out segments of Bulk Annuity contracts
(37) The Parties' market shares in the Buy-in and Buy-out segments of the market for Bulk
    Annuity contracts diverge significantly from their market shares in the overall Bulk
    Annuity contracts market. Specifically, the Parties' combined market shares for Buy-in
    transactions in 2013 in the UK reached [40-50]% in value with a minor increment of less
    than [0-5]% brought by MAL. On the market for Buy-out transactions the Parties'
    combined market shares in the UK remained very modest in 2013 at [10-20]% with an
    increment of [0-5]%; however, in 2012 and 2011 their market shares were significant at
    [50-60]% and [40-50]% respectively. Nevertheless, the Parties' market shares for Buy-
    out transaction in the UK for the period from 2010 to 2013 taken together would amount
    to approximately [20-30]%. The Parties' market shares for the years 2010-2013 are
    illustrated in tables 3 and 4 below.
  Table 3. Market share information for Buy-in transactions – UK.
    Year                 2010               2011                2012         2013
    Rothesay             [30-40]%           [5-10]%             [5-10]%      [40-50]%
    MAL                  [5-10]%            [10-20]%            [0-5]%       [0-5]%
    Combined             [30-40]%           [10-20]%            [5-10]%      [40-50]%
    Source: Form CO.
  Table 4. Market share information for Buy-out transactions – UK.
    Year                 2010               2011                2012         2013
    Rothesay             [5-10]%            [30-40]%            [40-50]%     [10-20]%
    MAL                  [5-10]%            [10-20]%            [10-20]%     [0-5]%
    Combined             [10-20]%           [40-50]%            [50-60]%     [10-20]%
    Source: Form CO.
(38) The Notifying Party's arguments related to the overall market for Bulk Annuity
    contracts also apply to each of the two sub-segments for Buy-in and Buy-out
    transactions. Indeed, the market share data show that each of the sub-segments is more
    volatile than the overall market for Bulk Annuity contracts. The Notifying Party submits
    in this regard that Rothesay concluded only […] Buy-in […] in each of 2010, 2011 and
    2012, and […] in 2013. Similarly, for Buy-out transactions Rothesay concluded […] in
    each of 2010 and 2011, […] in 2012 and […] in 2013.
(39) Additionally, in the market for Buy-in transactions MAL's presence, and hence the
    market share increment brought about by the Transaction, is particularly small at less
    than [0-5]%.
                                                      9

(40) The information obtained by the Commission in the course of its market investigation
    supports the view that there are no significant barriers to extending an offering of Buy-
    out transactions for an insurer active only in Buy-in or vice-versa.22 Therefore,
    competitors and new entrants would be able to react timely to hypothetical unilateral
    price increase by Rothesay in both the market for Buy-in or Buy-out transactions. In
    addition, as mentioned in paragraph 31, Just Retirement and Partnership are new
    entrants offering both Buy-in and Buy-out transactions.
(41) Consequently, it can be concluded that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as
    to its compatibility with the internal market even at narrower level, regarding the Buy-in
    and Buy-out segments of the market for Bulk Annuity contracts in the UK.
5.        CONCLUSION
(42) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
    Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger
    Regulation.
                                                               For the Commission
                                                               (signed)
                                                               Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                               Vice-President
22      Non-confidential reply to question 15 of questionnaire M.7204 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                         10
