                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 08.07.2014
                                                                 C(2014) 4943 final
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004                             PUBLIC VERSION
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.                                                  MERGER PROCEDURE
To the notifying party:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case M.7241 - ADVENT INTERNATIONAL/ BAIN CAPITAL
                INVESTORS/ NETS HOLDING
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041
(1)On 2 June 2014, the European Commission received a notification of a proposed
    concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by which
    Advent International Corporation ("Advent International", the U.S.) and Bain Capital
    Investors L.L.C ("Bain Capital", the U.S.) collectively referred to as "the Notifying
    Parties" acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint
    control of the undertaking Nets Holding A/S ("Nets", Denmark) by way of purchase
    of shares,2 hereinafter referred to as "the proposed transaction". The Notifying Parties
    and Nets are jointly referred to as "the Parties".
1.          THE PARTIES
(2)Advent International is a private equity investor with holdings in various sectors,
    including industrial, retail, media, communications, information technology, internet,
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ('the Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty
          on the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
          replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology
          of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2         Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 173, 07.06.2014, p. 9.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

   healthcare and pharmaceuticals. Advent International also controls Oberthur
   Technologies SAS ("Oberthur"), a company active in the provision of security-based
   smart cards technology and services. Oberthur also supplies certain private label cards
   in Denmark and Norway. Advent International also controls KMD Equity A/S
   ("KMD") a supplier of IT related services and products headquartered in Denmark.
(3)Bain Capital is a private equity investor with holdings in companies across a number
   of industries, among which, information technology, communications, healthcare,
   retail and consumer products.
(4)Bain Capital and Advent International jointly control WorldPay (UK) Limited and its
   affiliates (hereinafter "WorldPay"). WorldPay is a provider of electronic payment
   processing solutions for the most part to merchants located in the UK and the Republic
   of Ireland. It primarily offers merchant acquiring and payment card acquiring
   processing services, physical point of sale ("POS") terminals and distance payment
   cards services ("eCommerce").
(5)Nets is a provider of payments, cards and information services in Denmark, Norway,
   Sweden, Finland and Estonia. More specifically Nets provides payment solutions,
   business, information and E-security services to its customers. It operates the Dankort
   and BankAxept domestic card schemes in Denmark and Norway, respectively. It is
   active though Nets Oy as the financial issuer of credit cards in Finland. Nets also
   provides merchant solutions including physical POS payment processing services,
   eCommerce payment services dedicated to online merchants, as well as integrated
   payment services for merchants with both physical and online sales. Finally, through
   its subsidiary Teller, Nets provides merchant acquiring services for international
   payment cards, primarily in Denmark, Norway and Sweden.
2.        THE OPERATION
(6)The proposed transaction consists in the acquisition of joint control over Nets by Bain
   Capital and Advent International via a special purpose vehicle Nassa A/S ("Nassa").
   Post transaction Bain Capital and Advent International will hold each 47.25% of
   Nassa's capital, the remaining non-controlling stake of 5% will be held by ATP Funds.
   The Board of Directors of Nassa will be comprised of four directors. The Parties will
   each nominate one director and jointly nominate two independent directors.
   Resolutions of the Board of Nassa shall be passed by simple majority, provided that
   such majority must include at least one director nominated by Advent International
   and one director nominated by Bain Capital. Through their control of Nassa the Parties
   will jointly control Nets because they will have the right to indirectly appoint and
   remove seven out of twelve of the directors of the board of Nets that will undertake the
   day-to day and management functions, including approval of the budget and the
   business plan. Moreover, commercial decisions in respect of Nets will require consent
   of both Advent International and Bain Capital. It follows therefore that the Parties will
   exercise joint control over Nets.
(7)Therefore, the proposed transaction represents a concentration within the meaning of
   Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
                                                2

3.        EU DIMENSION
(8)The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
   than EUR 5 000 million3 (Advent International: EUR […] million, Bain Capital: EUR
   […] million, Nets: EUR […] million). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in
   excess of EUR […] million (Advent International: EUR […] million, Bain Capital:
   EUR […] million, Nets: EUR […] million), and they do not achieve more than two-
   thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
   The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension, within the meaning of Article
   1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
4.        ASSESSMENT
(9)The proposed transaction gives rise to affected markets in the field of payment
   services, in particular as regards the merchant acquiring services market and the
   market for the provision of acquiring processing services where both Nets and
   WorldPay are active4.
(10) More precisely, Nets and WorldPay both offer merchant acquiring and acquiring
   processing services to serve their national customers through the provision of physical
   POS terminals or web-enabled payment interfaces. Nets is focused on the provision of
   these services and actively targets customers based in Denmark, Finland, Sweden,
   Norway and Estonia. WorldPay is predominantly focused on supplying and targeting
   customers based in the UK and Ireland. Notwithstanding this very different geographic
   focus, WorldPay generates some revenues in Nets' core territories5 arising through
   sales aimed at supporting existing customers of WorldPay beyond the core
   jurisdictions in which those merchants are currently and for the most part serviced (the
   UK and Ireland) and mainly for eCommerce transactions. Insofar as large online
   merchants require merchant acquiring and acquiring processing solutions, WorldPay
   will support those retailers geographically according to the retailers' place of business.
   Similarly, as a general principle, Nets actively targets customers located in its core
   markets and generates no more than [0-5]% of its revenues outside these core markets.
3       Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5(1) of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
        Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p1).
4       There is also a limited horizontal overlap between the activities of Nets and KMD, a company
        controlled by Advent International, in the field of corporate distance payment services where they
        both supply credit transfer services via the Danish NemKonto payment scheme. Their combined
        market share will be of less than [0-5] % in any plausible geographic market definition. As regards
        vertical links, the proposed transactions results in a vertical link between the Trusted Service
        Managers services (TSM) offered by Advent International's subsidiary, Oberthur, and Nets' mobile
        wallet platform. According to the Parties, Nets is in the process of developing a mobile wallet
        platform solution but it is not yet active on this market. Oberthur's market share in the market for
        the provision of TSM services is below [20-30]% in any plausible geographic market
        definition..There is also a vertical relationship between Advent International's subsidiary, KMD,
        which supplies IT management services to a company jointly owned by Nets and Post Denmark
        A/S, e-Boks A/S ("e-Boks"), active in the supply of secure electronic mailbox services in Denmark
        and Norway. Nevertheless the market shares of both KMD and e-Boks in their respective markets
        are very low.
5       According to the Parties, in 2013 WorldPay revenues in Nets' core areas (Denmark, Estonia,
        Finland, Norway and Sweden) accounted for [0-5]% of the business unit's total revenues.
                                                          3

(11) On the whole, therefore, WorldPay and Nets target their services to firms located in
   their respective domestic regions and only provide services to a very limited extent in
   each other's core jurisdictions as a result of which the geographic overlap of their
   activities is very limited.
4.1.      Market definition
                  4.1.1. Merchant acquiring
4.1.1.1. Product market definition
(12) The Commission has previously defined separate markets for payment card issuing
   and merchant acquiring services.6 The Commission has also considered that merchant
   acquiring services should be regarded as a distinct product market from payment card
   processing.7 In addition, the Commission has envisaged a possible further
   segmentation, based on: (i) payment card schemes (domestic/international), (ii)
   payment card brands (Visa, Visa Electron, MasterCard, Maestro etc.) and (iii) the type
   of payment card (credit/debit).8
(13) In the present case a further segmentation between merchant acquiring services for
   payments through physical POS terminals and merchant acquiring services for
   payments through web-enabled interfaces (eCommerce) has been considered.
(14) In the opinion of the Notifying Parties the distinction between domestic and
   international cards is increasingly blurred because international cards can be used for
   domestic payments and also as a result of the creation of the Single Euro Payment
   Area. In addition, the fundamental services provided by the merchant acquirer are the
   same, irrespective of the card/scheme used. From the demand side, an overwhelming
   majority of merchants choose to enter into a single agreement to acquire merchant
   acquiring services covering as many types of payment cards as possible. Nevertheless,
   the Notifying Parties acknowledge the existence of pricing differences between
   domestic/international payment cards, between debit/credit cards and, between the
   different brands of cards.
6       See Commission decision of 3 October 2008 in Case No COMP/M.5241 – American
        Express/Fortis/Alpha Card, paragraph 23; Commission decision of 3 October 2007 in Case No
        COMP/M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets, Commission decision of 2 June 2005 in Case No
        M.3740 Barclays Bank/Foreningssparbanken/JV, paragraph. 11. In the context of antitrust
        proceeding see Commission decision of 19 December 2007 in Cases No COMP/34.579 –
        MasterCard, COMP/36.518 -EuroCommerce and COMP/38.580 – Commercial Cards.
7       See Commission decision of 3 October 2008 in Case No COMP/M.5241 – American
        Express/Fortis/Alpha Card, paragraph 23; Commission decision of 3 October 2007 in Case No
        COMP/M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets, Commission decision of 2 June 2005 in
        Case No M.3740 - Barclays Bank/Foreningssparbanken/JV, paragraph. 11. In the context
        of antitrust proceeding see Commission decision of 19 December 2007 in Cases No
        COMP/34.579 – MasterCard, COMP/36.518 - EuroCommerce and COMP/38.580 –
        Commercial Cards.
8       Case COMP/M.4316 Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC, paragraph 21; Case COMP/M.4814
        AIB/FDC/JV, paragraph 13; Case COMP/M.5968 Advent/Bain Capital/RBS WorldPay, paragraph
        12; Case COMP M.6956 Telefonica/Caixa Bank/Banco Santander/JV, paragraph 46; and Case
        COMP/M.6967 BNP Paribas Fortis/Belgacom/Belgian Mobile Wallet, paragraph 106.
                                                    4

(15) The Notifying Parties further submit that besides the existence of differences
   between merchant acquiring services provided through a physical POS terminal and
   through web-enabled interfaces the market should not be segmented in this way,
   essentially because the majority of merchants require both types of services.
   Nevertheless, there is a specific category of customers made of large online merchants
   (such as airline companies). WorldPay targets this customer category through its
   eCommerce division which has a wider geographic spread than WorldPay's remaining
   divisions, mirroring the global footprint of large online merchants.
(16) Ultimately, the Notifying Parties submit that it is not necessary to delineate the
   precise scope of the product market definition.
(17) The majority of the participants in the market investigation considered that the
   market for merchant acquiring services can be segmented based on the card schemes
   i.e. national/international. Customers generally consider this segmentation relevant for
   countries where there is a domestic card scheme in place such as Dankort in Denmark
   or BankAxept in Norway. This is due to the differences in terms of price. In addition
   some suppliers focus their business activities on one or the other type of card schemes.
   Customers may also have different merchant acquirers for international and for
   domestic card schemes.
(18) Customers and competitors also consider that the segmentation based on the type of
   card (credit/debit) is appropriate due to differences in terms of price, interchange fees
   or commercial conditions.
(19) As to the segmentation based on card brand, the Commission considers, on the basis
   of the results of the market investigation that from the demand side, there is no need to
   divide the market for merchant acquiring in this manner. By contrast, from the supply
   side the results of the market investigation were inconclusive.
(20) Finally, the majority of the respondents considered that the market could be
   segmented between merchant acquiring services for physical POS terminals and
   merchant acquiring services for web-enabled interfaces. This is due to material
   differences concerning technical infrastructure, commercial strategy, risk and fraud
   management requirements. Some customers have separate contracts for each type of
   services with different terms and conditions and even different services providers.
(21) The Commission considers that for the purpose of this case the market for merchant
   acquiring services could be segmented depending on the card scheme
   (national/international), the type of card (credit/debit), the card brand, and lastly
   depending on whether services are required for payments made through physical POS
   terminals or via web-enabled interfaces.
(22) However, the precise scope of the product market definition can be left open since
   the proposed transaction will not give rise to serious doubts as to it compatibility with
   the internal market irrespective of the product market definition.
                                                  5

4.1.1.2. Geographic market definition
(23) The Commission has previously found that the geographic market for merchant
   acquiring may be national in scope or is, at most, EEA wide, irrespective of the type of
   card, the card scheme and the card brand.9
(24) The Notifying Parties submit that the Commission does not need to conclude on the
   precise scope of the geographic market definition, since the proposed transaction gives
   rise to no competitive concerns even on the narrowest (national) level.
(25) As regards the hypothetical segment of merchant acquiring services for payments
   through web-enabled interfaces, the Notifying Parties consider that the market is at
   least EEA wide, if not worldwide.
(26) The results of the market investigation are inconclusive as regards whether the scope
   of merchant acquiring services for payments through a physical POS terminal is
   national or wider. However they point to a market definition wider than national for
   the segment of merchant acquiring services for payments through web-enabled
   interfaces.
(27) Indeed, even though some players provide POS services across the EEA, the
   respondents to the market investigation stress the importance of having a local
   presence and access to local infrastructure. In addition, the existence of national card
   schemes (such as Dankort in Denmark and BankAxept in Norway) and country
   specific technical requirements create obstacles for cross-border activity in the POS
   segment, which are less relevant for web-enabled activities.
(28) In Denmark, Dankort debit cards or co-branded Visa/Dankort cards are the most
   common payment product issued. The same applies to Norway and to the BankAxept
   national card scheme. Therefore, a merchant acquirer should be able to provide
   acceptance of these national cards in order to be competitive in these countries and be
   in a position to operate a large scale business. This factor is less important for web-
   enabled merchant acquiring services where the transactions are generally processed
   through international card schemes such as MasterCard or Visa.
(29) Further, payment services at the POS through physical terminals are made using
   "On-line" or "Off-line" technology, depending on the country. For instance, the UK
   and Ireland are "Off-line" PIN technology countries whereas Sweden, Denmark and
   Norway are based on "On-line" PIN technology. Therefore, […].
(30) Therefore, based on the result of the market investigation, and for the purpose of this
   case, the Commission considers that the market for merchant acquiring services for all
   plausible market segmentations, except web-enabled transactions, is most likely
   national in scope, whereas the market for merchant acquiring services for payments
   made through web-enabled interfaces would be at least EEA-wide. However, the
9       Case COMP/D.1/29.373 VISA II, paragraph 45; Case COMP/37.860 Morgan Stanley/Visa
        International and Visa Europe, paragraph 41; Case COMP/M.2567 Nordbanken/PostGirot,
        paragraphs 17-18; Case COMP/M.4316 Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC, paragraphs 19-23; Case
        COMP/M.5241 American Express/Fortis/Alpha Card, paragraph 28; Case COMP/M.5968
        Advent/Bain Capital/RBS WorldPay, paragraph 12; Case COMP M.6956 Telefonica/Caixa
        Bank/Banco Santander/JV, paragraph 46; and Case COMP/M.6967 BNP Paribas
        Fortis/Belgacom/Belgian Mobile Wallet, paragraph 106.
                                                     6

   precise scope of the geographic market definition can be left open since the proposed
   transaction does not give rise to serious doubts irrespective of the geographic market
   definition.
4.1.2.    Acquiring processing
4.1.2.1. Product market definition
(31) The Commission has previously defined a distinct market for payment card
   processing, and within that has distinguished between acquiring processing and
   payment card issuer processing, although it left the market definition open.10
(32) According to these previous decisions acquiring processing is the merchant oriented
   side of processing a transaction. It includes the network routing of payments towards
   the corresponding issuing entity and the POS authorisation. Issuing processing is the
   issuer oriented side of processing a card transaction. It mainly includes the financial
   and technical requests for payment authorization from the issuing entity, maintenance
   of local and international blocking lists, verification of card limits, management of
   card accounts, generation of cardholder statements and invoicing. The Parties agree
   with this product market definition.
(33) On the basis of the results of the market investigation, the Commission has
   confirmed that acquiring processing and issuing processing should be regarded as
   different segments due mainly to the nature of the services provided, the pricing
   structure, the regulatory framework and the competitive landscape. Indeed, the
   majority of players offering both services often provide them as separate services to
   their customers.
(34) In addition, several competitors have mentioned that national card schemes require
   processes specific to a particular country, whereas international schemes have the
   same processing in all countries.
(35) The Commission has also investigated whether a segmentation between services for
   POS transactions and services for web-enabled transactions should be made. One
   supplier explained that although transactions are processed in the same way when they
   reach the acquiring processor there are some differences as regard the technical
   infrastructure. Both suppliers and customers stress the particularly important role of
   security in the web-enabled segment due to the higher risk of fraud. However, the vast
   majority of the suppliers process both types of transactions. Also the majority of
   customers need acquiring processing for both POS transactions and web-enabled
   transactions.
(36) Therefore, based on the results of the market investigation, and for the purpose of
   this case, the Commission considers that the market for acquiring processing services
   could be further segmented between national/international card schemes, and between
   acquiring processing for POS transactions and acquiring processing for web-enabled
   transactions. Ultimately, the precise scope of the product market definition can be left
10      Case COMP/M.4316 Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC, paragraph 17; Case COMP/M.4814
        AIB/FDC/JV,    paragraph 15; and Case COMP/M.5968 Advent/Bain Capital/RBS WorldPay,
        paragraph 12.
                                                 7

   open, since the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
   compatibility with the internal market with respect to any plausible market definition.
  4.1.2.1.      Geographic market definition
(37) The Commission has previously left open the geographic market for acquiring
   processing services11, although it mentioned that for processing national payment
   cards the market tends to remain national due to various entry barriers. The most
   recent market investigation indicated that acquiring processing also with respect to
   international cards is still national in scope.12
(38) The Notifying Parties consider that, should there be a segmentation between
   POS/web-enabled transactions, the geographic scope of the market for acquiring
   processing transactions at the POS would be national, whereas the scope of the market
   for acquiring processing for web-enabled transactions would be wider, EEA or even
   global. According to the Notifying Parties, this is due to the fact that online merchants,
   with a presence in more than one country, will often enter into a single contract for all
   their acquiring processing needs. Moreover, the procurement of acquiring processing
   services by such customers is usually centralised. In addition, there are no territorial
   restrictions to enter the market for acquiring processing for web-enabled transactions
   with regard to Europe, insofar as suppliers do not need to have local presence to
   provide services in one specific country, provided that customers' card scheme
   acquiring licences cover the relevant country or are pan-European.
(39) On the basis of the results of the market investigation, the Commission considers that
   for the purpose of this case the scope of the market for acquiring processing, for all
   plausible market segmentations except web-enabled transactions, is national. This is
   due to limitations related to the need to have local presence and connections with the
   local POS infrastructure and other legal requirements. Moreover, some suppliers
   mentioned that in some countries, referring to Denmark and Norway, there are strong
   national elements related to the existence of national card schemes that limit cross-
   border activity for processing national cards (technical requirements in particular).
(40) As regards the geographic scope of the market for acquiring processing for web-
   enabled transactions, on the basis of the results of the market investigation the
   Commission considers that it could be wider than national, most probably EEA-wide.
   Indeed, customers indicated that in order to cover their needs in this segment they look
   for suppliers that are able to handle transactions in several jurisdictions.
(41) However, the geographic market definition can be left open for the purpose of this
   case as the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility
   with the internal market with respect to any geographic definition.
11      Case COMP/M.4316 Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC, paragraph 26-27; Case COMP/M.4814
        AIB/FDC/JV,     paragraph 15; and Case COMP/M.5968 Advent/Bain Capital/RBS WorldPay,
        paragraph 12.
12      Case COMP/M.4814 AIB/FDC/JV, paragraph 20.
                                                   8

4.2.      Competitive assessment
4.2.1.    Merchant acquiring
(42) The activities of Nets and WorldPay overlap in the provision of merchant acquiring
   services in Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Norway, Sweden and the UK.
(43) The overlaps giving rise to affected markets are limited to Finland, Ireland, UK,
   Denmark and Norway.
(44) In the first three countries the increment is close to[0-5]% (due to the limited
   presence of WorldPay in Finland and of Nets in Ireland and the UK) and the combined
   market share of Nets and WorlPay does not exceed [50-60]% ([50-60]% in Finland,
   [20-30]% in Ireland and [30-40]% in the UK).
(45) In Denmark and Norway the combined market share of Nets and WorldPay exceeds
   [50-60]% and the increment, although limited ([0-5]% or less), is higher for certain
   segments. Therefore, the competitive assessment will focus on these two countries.
(46) The Commission will first assess the market for merchant acquiring services and will
   then analyse the segmentations based on the differences between national/international
   card schemes, credit/debit cards and card brands. Finally, it will focus on the
   alternative segmentation based on the differences between merchant acquiring services
   for payments at the POS through physical terminals and merchant acquiring services
   for payments through web-enabled interfaces.
   (i)Overall market for merchant acquiring in Denmark and Norway
(47) The Notifying Parties submit that WorldPay's market share generated in Denmark
   and Norway corresponds to merchants located in Ireland and the UK which have
   specifically requested a uniform e-Commerce payment solution across its international
   operations (or in a specific territory).
(48) In Denmark, the combined market shares of Nets and WorldPay on the overall
   market for merchant acquiring is [90-100]% in 2013. However, the overlap generated
   by WorldPay's limited activities in this country is of only [0-5]%. Post-transaction, the
   Parties will continue to compete with Nordea and Swedbank each of them having a
   market share of[0-5]%. As to Norway, the Notifying Parties combined market share on
   the overall market for merchant acquiring is [5-10]% with an increment of [0-5]%,
   thus it does not result into an affected market.
   (ii) Market segmentations based on the differences between national/international
   card schemes, credit/debit cards and card brands.
(49) Should the market be split into national/international card schemes, the overlap
   would arise as regards international card schemes only. The combined market share of
   the Nets and WorldPay in this segment in Denmark would be [80-90]% with an
   increment of [0-5]%. The HHI is [6000-7000] and the post-merger HHI delta [200-
   300]. According to the Notifying Parties, the market share would not differ materially
   if a segmentation into credit/debit cards, or card brands was considered. WorldPay
   offers essentially merchant acquiring for international card schemes, and focuses
   mainly on merchant acquiring services for credit cards and for international card
   brands. Nets and WorldPay will continue to compete post-transaction on the segment
                                                 9

   for international card schemes with Swedbank and Nordea, having each a market share
   of [5-10]%.
(50) In Norway, if only international card schemes were considered the combined market
   share of the Parties would be [40-50]% in 2013 with an increment of [0-5]%. The
   market shares would not be materially different if a segmentation between credit/debit
   cards or card brands was considered. In the segment for international card schemes,
   the Notifying Parties will continue to face competitive constrains from other market
   players among which Elavon ([20-30] %), Nordea ([10-20]%), Handelsbanken ([5-
   10]%) and Swedbank ([5-10]%).
   (iii) Market segmentation based on the differences between merchant acquiring
   services for payments through POS terminals and merchant acquiring services for
   payments through web-enabled interfaces
(51) Worldpay does not have physical presence or POS terminals in Denmark and
   Norway. The Commission has confirmed this on the basis of the market investigation.
   Therefore, should the market be segmented into merchant acquiring for payments at
   the POS through physical terminals and merchant acquiring for payments through
   web-enabled interfaces, the overlap arising in Denmark and Norway would be limited
   to the second segment mentioned.
(52) As indicated in the section on geographic market definition the geographic scope of
   the segment concerning the provision of merchant acquiring services for payments
   through web-enabled interfaces would be wider than national, probably EEA-wide or
   even global. The combined market shares of the Parties in a hypothetical EEA wide
   market would be of [10-20]% (with an increment of [0-5]% for Nets).
(53) Even though there is no overlap as regards the Danish and Norwegian markets for
   merchant acquiring services for payments at the POS through physical terminals, the
   market investigation revealed that WorldPay has [limited activity] in Finland for the
   provision of merchant acquiring and acquirer processing services for payments at the
   POS. Therefore, the Commission has investigated whether WorldPay can be
   considered as a significant potential competitor in this market.
   As regards Denmark and Norway, competitors consider the domestic card schemes
   existing in these countries as the main barrier to entry, followed by the need to set up
   local infrastructure and the need to adjust to some specific technical requirements.
   Indeed, the Finnish national card scheme has been phased out, as opposed to Denmark
   and Norway where it plays an important role. In addition, Finland is a country based
   on "Off-line" PIN technology as it is the case for WorldPay's core countries, namely
   the UK and Ireland, whereas Denmark and Norway are based on "On-line" PIN
   technology. According to the Notifying Parties, the lack of a national card scheme and
   the similarities in terms of PIN technology between the UK and Ireland on the one
   side and Finland on the other side […]. In any case the overlap in this country is close
   to [0-5]% for all segments even if account is taken of this recent contract.
(54) The Notifying Parties submit and the internal documents provided show that […].
(55) Overall customers and competitors consider that following the transaction, the
   intensity of competition in the market for merchant acquiring will remain unchanged,
   irrespective of the segment considered. WorldPay is not perceived as a player
   currently exerting a significant competitive constraint in Nets' core jurisdictions, nor as
                                                10

   a potential competitor. In any case, there are other players that could be seen as
   potential competitors (Barclays, Global Collect, Ongone, etc.)
(56) In the light of the above mentioned elements, the Commission considers that the
   proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
   internal market.
4.2.2.     Acquiring Processing
(57) In the overall market for acquiring processing, the Parties' activities overlap in
   Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Ireland, Norway, Sweden and the UK. Due to their
   different geographic focus, in all these countries the increment brought by the
   transaction would be minimal (less than [0-5]%). However, in Denmark and Norway
   Nets' market shares in the last three financial years on the overall market for acquiring
   processing were very high (in 2013 they reached [90-100] % in Denmark and [90-
   100]% in Norway)13. Therefore, the analysis of the impact of the proposed transaction
   will focus only on these two countries.
       (i) Overall market for acquiring processing in Denmark and Norway
(58) According to the Notifying Parties, their position in the overall market for acquiring
   processing does not give raise to any competition concerns for several reasons. Firstly,
   the increment brought by the transaction is of less than [0-5]% and the HHI delta is of
   less than [100-200]. Secondly, WorldPay focuses on UK and Ireland, […]. Thirdly,
   WorldPay's transactions in Denmark and Norway are […]. Moreover, WorldPay is
   providing acquiring processing services to its services as an ancillary service to its
   merchant acquiring activities for its customers […].
(59) In addition, the Parties mention a recent decision of the Danish Competition
   Authority that imposes Nets to follow certain maximum prices with respect to front-
   end acquiring processing for a period of two years. Also in Norway, Nets (i.e., Nets
   and Teller) is under an obligation to grant non-discriminatory access to its payment
   solutions until 2017.
(60) Finally, the Parties mentioned banks' capabilities to conduct their own acquiring
   processing services (as it is the case in Sweden, where the majority of banks have this
   service internalised).
(61) Indeed, the presence of WorldPay in these two markets does not reveal constant sales
   volume. Moreover, a review of the market shares for the last three consecutive years
   shows that the volume of the transactions of WorldPay in both Denmark and Norway
   has […] (with the exception of year 2012 when the volume for transactions in
   Denmark […] compared the previous year).
(62) The replies of the participants in the market investigation indicate that WorldPay is
   perceived as a provider oriented towards customers using mostly web-enabled
   transactions, whereas Nets seems to be rather focused on merchants with physical POS
   terminals, with a dominant position in both Denmark and Norway.
13       In the other markets the combined market shares were of [60-70]% in Estonia, [90-100]% in
         Finland, [30-40]% in Ireland, [10-20]% in Sweden and [40-50]% in UK. In all these countries, the
         overlap is close to [0-5]%.
                                                      11

(63) On the basis of the results of the market investigation, the Commission has
   confirmed too that WorldPay is not a close competitor of Nets in acquiring processing
   and that it is hardly known as supplier of acquiring processing services in Denmark or
   Norway. Moreover, the Commission has also confirmed that banks have their in-house
   capabilities to do acquiring processing themselves.
(64) Therefore the Commission considers that the proposed transaction does not raise
   serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market regarding the overall
   market for acquiring processing services.
    (ii) Market segmentation based on the differences between acquiring processing
    services for national/international card schemes
(65) Should the market be segmented between national/international card schemes the
   overlap would only arise as regards international cards schemes as WorldPay does not
   provide acquiring processing services for national cards schemes.
(66) In Denmark, the combined market shares of the Parties excluding the national cards
   transactions (transactions processed through Dankort scheme) are similar to the ones
   on the overall market for acquiring processing, and reach [90-100]% in 2013 with an
   increment of [0-5]% brought by WorldPay. In Norway, the market position would be
   slightly different reaching [60-70]% in 2013 if the national cards transactions
   (transactions processed through BankAxept scheme) are excluded, with an increment
   of [0-5]% brought by WorldPay.
(67) In spite of the limited competition remaining post-merger, the arguments mentioned
   above as regards the overall market for acquiring processing are relevant also for the
   hypothetical market of acquiring processing for international cards schemes, which is
   the only segment where WorldPay is active. Therefore, based on these arguments the
   Commission considers that the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to
   its compatibility with the internal market regarding acquiring processing for
   international cards schemes.
    (iii) Market segmentation based on the differences between acquiring processing for
    payments through POS terminals and acquiring processing for payments through
    web-enabled interfaces
(68) Should the market be segmented into acquiring processing for POS/web-enabled
   transactions, the second segment would not be an affected market as the combined
   market shares of the Parties would remain below [10-20]% at EEA level, with
   WorldPay and Nets competing with other suppliers such as Elavon, Barclays, First
   Data, etc.
(69) As for the segment for physical POS, WorldPay is not active in the countries where
   Nets is present, except for […]. Nets and Worldpay combined market share on the
   market for physical POS in Finland is estimated at [90-100]% due to Nets share.
   However, the increment is close to [0-5]% and, as explained above, […].
(70) In the light of the above mentioned elements, the Commission considers that the
   proposed transaction will not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
   internal market.
                                                12

5.       CONCLUSION
(71) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
   notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
   EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
   Merger Regulation.
                                                    For the Commission
                                                    (signed)
                                                    Joaquín ALMUNIA
                                                    Vice-President
                                              13
