                               EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                Brussels, 13.3.2015
                                                                C(2015) 1791 final
  In the published version of this decision, some                        PUBLIC VERSION
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are
                                                                     MERGER PROCEDURE
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.
To the notifying party:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case M.7478 - AVIVA/ FRIENDS LIFE/ TENET
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the European Economic
                Area2
(1)         On 6 February 2015, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
            concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which Aviva plc
            (Aviva, UK) will acquire sole control over Friends Life Ltd (Friends Life, UK) and
            Tenet Group Ltd (Tenet, UK) within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
            regulation. Aviva, Friends Life and Tenet are collectively referred to as "the
            Parties".
1.          THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
(2)         Aviva provides a broad range of insurance, savings and investment products in 17
            countries, principally in the UK, France and Canada and elsewhere in Europe and
            Asia. Aviva also provides reinsurance and asset management services.
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ('the Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
          the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
          replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
          the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2         OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p.3 ("the EEA Agreement").
                                                           2

(3)   Friends Life provides pension, investment and insurance products and services.
      Friends Life operates from the UK, Germany, the United Arab Emirates,
      Singapore, Hong Kong and the Isle of Man.
(4)   Tenet distributes investment products, protection products, non-life insurance and
      mortgages. Tenet also provides adviser support services in the investment, non-
      investment and mortgage market. Tenet is active in the UK. Tenet is currently not
      controlled by any of its shareholders.
(5)   The proposed transaction consists of the acquisition of the entire issued and to be
      issued ordinary share capital of Friends Life by Aviva. The transaction will also
      lead to Aviva acquiring [20-30]% shares in Tenet, currently owned by Friends Life,
      which will add to Aviva's [20-30]% stake. As a result, Aviva will hold (directly and
      indirectly through Friends Life) [40-50]% of shares in Tenet. Two other
      shareholders hold less than 25% of Tenet's shares each, while under the
      shareholders agreement, adopting strategic commercial decisions requires a 60%
      majority. Consequently, post-transaction, Aviva with the shareholding of [40-50]%
      will be able to veto strategic commercial decisions regarding Tenet. Therefore,
      Aviva will acquire negative sole control over Tenet.
(6)   Consequently, the proposed transaction constitutes an acquisition of sole control by
      Aviva over Friends Life and Tenet, and therefore a concentration within the
      meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
2.    EU DIMENSION
(7)   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
      more than EUR 5 000 million3 (Aviva: EUR 28,163 million, Friends Life EUR
      6,999 million, Tenet: EUR 138 million). At least two of them have an EU-wide
      turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (Aviva: EUR […] million, Friends Life
      EUR […] million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
      EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
(8)   Therefore, the proposed transaction has an EU dimension within the meaning of
      Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
3.    RELEVANT MARKETS
3.1.  Introduction
(9)   The proposed transaction gives rise to horizontal overlaps in relation to the supply
      of insurance in France, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Poland, Spain and the UK and in
      insurance distribution in the UK. However, only the UK life insurance market,
      namely the overall market for the supply of protection products and its two sub-
      segments (for individual and for group customers) constitute affected markets
      within the meaning of the Merger Regulation.
(10)  The transaction also leads to the following vertical links, none of which leads to a
      vertically affected market:
3    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
     Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.04.2008, p1).
                                                     3

             <U+F02D> between the downstream insurance activities of Aviva and Friends Life and
                  the upstream asset management and reinsurance services offered by Aviva,
                  and
             <U+F02D> between the upstream insurance activities of Aviva and Friends Life and the
                  downstream insurance distribution offered by Friends Life and Tenet.
(11)      For the sake of completeness, it should be noted that Parties' activities do not
          overlap in any non-life insurance or reinsurance market.
3.2.      Product markets
(12)      In previous decisions relating to the insurance sector, the Commission
          distinguished between three large categories of insurance: life insurance, non-life
          insurance and reinsurance.4
(13)      As regards the life insurance market, the Commission considered segmenting the
          market according to the risk covered/service provided into (i) pure protection
          products, (ii) savings and investment products and (iii) pension products.5
          Additionally, the Commission segmented the market according to the category of
          customers to which the products are addressed, namely between life insurance
          offered to individuals and to group customers.6 The Commission has so far left the
          exact market definition open.
(14)      The Notifying Party does not contest the previous assessment of the Commission.
          In any event the exact product market segmentation for life insurance market can
          be left open in this case as the transaction does not raise competition concerns
          under any plausible market definition.
     i. Subdivision according to the risk covered/service provided
(15)      Generally, the market investigation in this case supports the above distinction
          between the three categories of life insurance products into pure protection
          products, savings and investment products and pension products. Majority of life
          insurance providers have different dedicated teams of staff for each of the three
          categories and almost all of them recognise that these different products serve
          different categories of customers. The respondents widely confirm that different
          regulatory and/or tax treatment apply to different life insurance products, as
          described above.
(16)      Furthermore, the market investigation revealed that some life insurance providers
          tend to specialise in a given category of products, for example pension products or
4       See Case No COMP/M.2400 Dexia/Artesia; Case No. COMP/M.2225, Fortis/ASR; Case No.
        COMP/M.1989, Winterthur/Colonial; Case No COMP/M.1886, CGU/Norwich Union; Case No
        COMP/M.1910, Meritanordbanken/Unidanmark; Case No COMP/M.1816, Churchill Insurance
        Group/Hig Holdings; Case No COMP/M.1777, CGU/Hibernian, COMP/M.6883 Canada Life/Irish
        Life.
5       Case No. COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance business. Case No. COMP/M.6521 – Talanx
        International Meiji Yasuda Life insurance/Warta.
6       Case No. COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV para 22; Case No COMP/M.4701
        Generali/PPF Insurance Bbusiness, para 20.
                                                         4

      protection products. This is also to a certain extent evidenced by the diverse market
      shares of the main players in these three broad segments, for example important
      market share of Unum in group protection products and much lower in other
      products, or Aviva’s low market share in savings and investment products, as
      compared protection products.
      Pure protection products
(17)  The Commission previously considered that the pure protection insurance products
      are products, where in return for a regular premium the insurer agrees to pay a
      lump sum on a certain specified event such as death or serious illness. These type
      of policies may include mortgage protection policies; term life insurance (i.e.
      protection for a defined period, where the policyholder chooses the cash sum
      required covering their families in the event of death or the expiration of the
      policy); whole life policies (which pay on death of the insured); and critical illness
      cover.7
(18)  Although several products exist in within the category of pure protection products
      which are not substitutable from demand side, the market investigation provided
      indications that there is no need to further sub-segment pure protection products as
      there is a high degree of supply-side substitutability in a sense that an insurer
      offering one pure protection product can easily start offering any other type of pure
      protection products.
      Pension products
(19)  The Commission previously considered that life insurance products which allow
      the accumulation of funds for the purposes of the provision of retirement income as
      well as products which provide such retirement income to the beneficiaries should
      be together referred to as pension products.8 The products in the first category tend
      to be called 'accumulation' products while the products in the second category are
      called 'decumulation' products.
(20)  Within life insurance pension products both Aviva and Friends Life offer both the
      accumulation and the decumulation products for individuals and for group
      customers.
(21)  The results of the market investigation indicate that generally in the UK pension
      products encompass accumulation products (where one can distinguish defined
      benefit and defined contribution pension types) and the decumulation products
      (mainly annuities and income drawdown). The respondents explained that annuities
      in general mean drawing a guaranteed income for the rest of life of person insured
      while income drawdown offers drawing an income, but retaining the money
      invested with a view to further growth.
(22)  Based on the market investigation there is no need to further sub-segment pension
      products since vast majority of insurance providers offer both accumulation and
      decumulation products, and those who offer only one of these two categories,
7    Case COMP/M.6883 Canada Life/Irish Life, para 12.
8    Case COMP/M.6883 Canada Life/Irish Life, para 12.
                                                  5

          indicated that this is based on their commercial choice, which confirms high supply
          side substitutability.
         Savings and investment products
(23)      Products in this category provide a wealth accumulation service to consumers
          usually offering tax advantages. They may include tracker funds (where the
          investment return over a specified period is based on the performance of one or
          more stock market indexes), guaranteed funds (providing a guaranteed return over
          a specified period), managed funds (pooled funds investing in a mix of assets such
          as equities, securities and properties), personal investment plans, personal equity
          plans, etc. In general, the products within this category are insurance product with
          an investment element and they differ according to the mechanism used to generate
          returns.9 As explained by some respondents to the market investigation, in the UK
          one can also distinguish the on-shore investment bonds and the off-shore bonds, the
          latter investing into funds outside the UK.
(24)      The replies to the market investigation indicate that savings and investment life
          insurance products encompass insurance products which enable the accumulation
          of wealth in a tax efficient manner. At the same time the market investigation
          provided indications that there is no need to further sub-segment savings and
          investment products, since most insurance providers are able to offer wide range of
          savings and investment products as a result of which there is a high degree of
          supply-side substitutability.
     ii. Subdivision according to the nature of the customer: individual vs. group
(25)      The Commission also considered a distinction of life insurance products based on
          customer type, segmenting between individuals and groups (group typically refers
          to the provision of insurance products by corporations to their employees).10
          Consequently, the Commission considered that each of the life insurance markets
          i.e. pure protection products, pension products as well as investment-based life
          insurance products can be offered on both individual and group basis.
(26)      The results of the market investigation in this case support this distinction between
          individual and group customers. Almost all of the life insurance providers, who
          offer both individual and group life insurance products, apply for them different
          strategies, different marketing teams and offer different products. The fact that
          some life insurance providers (for example Unum) and some life insurance
          distributors choose to target mainly one category of customers (either individual or
          group) also supports the distinction between individual and group life insurance
          products.
9        Case COMP/M.6883 Canada Life/Irish Life, para 16.
10       Case COMP/M.6846 Aegon/Santander/Santander Vida/ Santander Generales, para 21.
                                                      6

     iii. Conclusion
(27)       The market investigation overall confirmed that the life insurance products can be
           segmented based on the service provided into i) pure protection products, ii)
           savings and investment products and iii) pension products and based on the
           customer base into i) products for individuals and ii) products for group customers.
           In any event, in this case, the question of whether the life insurance market ought to
           be segmented taking into account the different risks covered and/or the nature of
           the customer (or possibly even further) can be left open since the transaction does
           not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in any
           plausible market segment.
3.3.       Geographic market
(28)       The Commission in its previous decisions considered the geographic market for life
           insurance to be national in scope due to the following elements: (i) existence of
           national distribution channels, (ii) national regulatory framework and fiscal
           regimes, (iii) national established brands. However, the exact product market
           definition has been left open.11
(29)       The activities of the Parties are concentrated in the UK. The Notifying Party does
           not contest the previous assessment of the Commission as regards the geographic
           market definition of the life insurance market.
(30)       The market investigation in this case did not provide any indications that the
           geographic market should be wider or narrower than national. In any event, the
           geographic market definition can be left open for the purpose of this decision, since
           the transaction does not give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
           internal market irrespective of the exact geographic market definition.
4.         COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
(31)       The transaction would give rise to affected markets in relation to: i) the overall
           provision of pure protection products in the UK, ii) the provision of group pure
           protection products in the UK and iii) the provision of individual pure protection
           products in the UK.
11        Case COMP/M.6883 Canada Life/Irish Life, para 19.
                                                       7


(37) The market investigation broadly confirmed that Aviva tends to offer simpler less
     expensive products, while Friends Life targets more upmarket customers with
     better quality and more complex offerings. Furthermore, many of the replies
     suggested that Aviva and Friends Life are not the closest competitors in life
     insurance in the UK, to the contrary, the respondents highlighted different strengths
     of Aviva and Friends Life. In particular, Aviva is considered to have a strong
     brand, very good distribution network and large scale (while is supposed to be
     weak in specialisation), while Friends Life is considered to be competitive in
     offering product quality and range, mainly in some protection products and group
     pension products. The replies to the market investigation suggest that for example
     Legal & General is a closer competitor of Aviva than Friends Life.
(38) In addition, the Notifying Party argues that in the UK there are no practical,
     financial, legal or other barriers to switching an insurance provider. Individual
     customers are typically not tied to long term contracts and they regularly switch
     insurance providers. Furthermore, the growth of online distributors and the
     presence of intermediaries such as Independent Financial Advisors who look across
     the market to offer individual customers the best rates have increased the ability
     and incentive for customer to switch providers in response to price considerations.
(39) The market investigation broadly confirmed that switching for individual
     customers is easy, in particular as regards the pension products. As regards
     contracts for group protection, products are reviewed on a regular basis, mostly
     every two to three years. Moreover, there is typically no surrender value or
     redemption penalty when stopping a policy and changing to another provider. In
     many cases, third parties, such as brokers or Risk/Specialist Employment Benefit
     Consultants look across the market in order to present the best deals for their
     clients (typically corporations looking to provide group protection products for
     their employees).
(40) Finally, the Notifying Party submits that the barriers to enter the insurance market
     in the UK are low. Set up cost for a protection provider in another Member State to
     enter the UK market or for an insurance provider to start offering protection
     products are low, in particular, a lot of services, such as reinsurance, technological
     infrastructure or administration services. Low barriers to entry are also
     demonstrated by the recent successful entries by Ageas (entry in 2010) and Beagle
     Street (2012, first online only provider of life insurance in the UK).
(41) While the market investigation provided indications that for complete de novo
     entrants regulatory and capital requirements are considered as the main challenges,
     followed by the low profit margins combined with the lack of immediate returns
     and the necessity to build scale and market credibility, the market investigation
     confirmed the existence of supply-side substitutability between various life
     insurance products, so for companies present in one life insurance segment it would
     be relatively easy to penetrate other segments. In addition, the fact that relatively
     new players such as Zurich, MetLife and Ellipse were able to grow further
     indicates that the barriers to entry in this market are not insurmountable.
(42) In general, the Notifying Party submits that the market for the provision of
     protection products in the UK is characterized by intense competition, and
     customers hold generally bargaining power, in particular larger group customers.
     This was confirmed by the results of the market investigation where market
     participants consider that the life insurance market is competitive in the UK. In
                                                 9

     addition, the market investigation did not reveal any substantiated concerns about
     the impact of the transaction on the UK life insurance market.
(43) Against this background, the Commission concludes that the transaction does not
     give rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market.
5.   CONCLUSION
(44) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
     notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
     EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
     Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                   For the Commission
                                                   (Signed)
                                                   Violeta BULC
                                                   Member of the Commission
                                              10
