                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 16.9.2015
                                                                 C(2015) 6463 final
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004                            PUBLIC VERSION
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
                                                                     MERGER PROCEDURE
general description.
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case M.7711 - ADVENT INTERNATIONAL/ BAIN CAPITAL/ ICBPI
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the European Economic
                Area2
1)      On 12 August 2015, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
        concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which funds managed
        by Advent International Corporation ("Advent International", USA) and funds
        managed by Bain Capital Investors, L.L.C. ("Bain Capital", USA) acquire within the
        meaning of Article 3(1)(b) and 3(4) of the Merger Regulation joint control over
        Istituto Centrale delle Banche Popolari Italiane S.p.A. ("ICBPI", Italy) by way of
        purchase of shares.3
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ('the Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
          the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
          replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
          the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2         OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p.3 ("the EEA Agreement").
3         Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 278, 22.8.2015, p. 7.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

2)   Advent International and Bain Capital are designated hereinafter as the "Notifying
     Parties".
1.       THE PARTIES
3)   ICBPI is a banking group active in Italy in the issuing of payment cards, merchant
     acquiring, terminal management, payment services, securities services and
     regulatory/compliance management services. ICBPI is currently owned by a number
     of Italian cooperative banks, with no shareholder exercising control.
4)   Advent International is a private equity investor active in various sectors, including
     industrial, retail, media, communications, information technology, internet, healthcare
     and pharmaceuticals.
5)   Bain Capital is a private equity investment firm that invests in companies across many
     industries, including information technology, healthcare, retail and consumer products,
     communication, financial and industrial/manufacturing.
6)   In addition, Advent International and Bain Capital jointly control4 Worldpay, a
     company providing merchant acquiring and acquirer processing payment services, and
     Nets, a company providing payment, card and information services.
7)   Finally, Advent International solely controls Oberthur, a company providing security
     solutions for payment, identity, telecommunications and mobile sectors on a
     worldwide basis.
2.       THE OPERATION AND THE CONCENTRATION
8)   On 19 June 2015, Advent International, Bain Capital and Clessidra SGR S.p.A.
     (“Clessidra”), entered into a Sale and Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which Advent
     International and Bain Capital each intend to acquire an indirect interest of
     approximately 36% of ICBPI. The remaining 13% of shares will be held by Clessidra
     and 15% of shares will be held by a number of Italian cooperative banks some of
     which are current shareholders of ICBPI.
   Joint control
9)   Pursuant to the Equity Term Sheet and the draft Investment and Shareholders’
     Agreement (the "SHA"), Advent International and Bain Capital will jointly control
     ICBPI while other shareholders will only have minority rights. Specifically, ICBPI
     will be managed by a Board of Directors comprised of 13 directors. Advent
     International and Bain Capital each will be entitled to appoint 4 directors.5
     Resolutions of the Board of Directors, including all strategic matters such as the
     adoption of the business plan and the annual budget and the appointment and removal
     of the chairman, chief executive officer, chief financial officer and other senior
     managers will be passed by a simple majority, which must however include the
4      Case COMP/M.5968 - Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/RBS Worldpay, Case
       COMP/M.7241 Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding.
5      The remaining members of the board of directors will comprise two directors appointed by Clessidra,
       two directors appointed by other shareholders (i.e. the current shareholder banks), and the Chief
       Executive Officer.
                                                      2

       consent of at least one director appointed by each of Advent International and Bain
       Capital. As a result, only Advent International and Bain Capital will have a veto right
       in respect of any strategic resolution. It follows that Advent International and Bain
       Capital will jointly control ICBPI.
    Full-function character
10)    Following the Transaction, ICBPI will continue to be active on each of the markets in
       which it currently operates, and it will continue to be economically autonomous from
       its parents from an operational perspective. In particular, ICBPI will have its own
       dedicated management (including an executive board) and access to sufficient
       resources. In addition, ICBPI will be independent of the Notifying Parties for any
       sales or purchases. Finally, ICBPI will conduct its business on a lasting basis.
11)    The Transaction therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article
       3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
3.         UNION DIMENSION
12)    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
       than EUR 5 000 million (Advent International: EUR […], Bain Capital: EUR […],
       ICBPI: EUR 664 million). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR
       250 million (Advent International: EUR […], Bain Capital: EUR […], ICBPI: EUR
       662 million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide
       turnover within one and the same Member State.
13)    The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the
       Merger Regulation.
4.         ASSESSMENT
4.1.       Product market definition
4.1.1.     Merchant acquiring services
14)    In previous decisions, the Commission has defined a separate market for merchant
       acquiring services that is distinct from payment card processing. 6 In addition, the
       Commission has envisaged a possible further segmentation, based on: (i) payment card
       schemes (domestic/international), (ii) payment card brands (Visa, Visa Electron,
       MasterCard, Maestro etc.), (iii) the type of payment card (credit/debit) and (iv)
       services for payments through physical POS terminals and web-enabled interfaces
       (eCommerce).7
15)    The Notifying Parties submit that the above mentioned sub-segmentation of the
       product market for merchant acquiring is not appropriate, because (i) merchants
       generally want to be able to accept as broad range of payment cards as possible and
       (ii) merchant acquirers generally offer services for all payment cards and in all cases
       the fundamental service offered by the merchant acquirer is the same.
6        Case COMP/M.7241 – Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding paragraph 21, Case
         COMP/M.5241 – AmericanExpress/Fortis/Alpha Card, paragraph 23.
7        Case COMP/M.7241 – Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding, paragraph 21.
                                                     3

16)    In any event, for the purpose of this Decision, the exact product market definition for
       merchant acquiring services can be left open, as the Transaction does not give rise to
       serious doubts as regards its compatibility with the internal market irrespective of the
       precise market definition.
4.1.2.    Manufacturing and supply of smart payment cards
17)    In a previous decision, the Commission considered that manufacturing and supply of
       smart payment cards to financial institutions constitute a separate market distinct from
       the overall market for secure plastic cards.8
18)    The Notifying Parties do not contest the previous assessment of the Commission.
19)    In any event, for the purpose of this Decision, the exact product market definition for
       manufacturing and supply of smart payment cards can be left open as the Transaction
       does not give rise to serious doubts as regards its compatibility with the internal
       market irrespective of the precise market definition.
4.1.3.    Card issuing
20)    The Commission has previously found a separate product market for card issuing that
       is distinct from merchant acquiring and card processing.9 In addition, the Commission
       considered a potential sub-segmentation of the market between: (i) debit vs.
       credit/charge card issuing, (ii) universal/hybrid store credit cards vs. special purpose
       credit card issuing, and (iii) personal vs. corporate card issuing.10
21)    The Notifying Parties do not contest the previous assessment of the Commission.
22)    In any event, for the purpose of this Decision, the exact product market definition for
       card issuing can be left open as the Transaction does not give rise to serious doubts as
       regards its compatibility with the internal market irrespective of the precise market
       definition.
4.2.      Geographic markets
4.2.1.    Merchant acquiring services
23)    In previous decisions, the Commission found that the geographic market for merchant
       acquiring, including all possible segmentations, with the exception of web-enabled
       transactions, may be national in scope or is, at most, not wider than the EEA. In
       respect of web-enabled transactions (merchant acquiring for online merchants), the
       Commission has considered that this may be EEA-wide but has ultimately left the
       exact market definition open.11
8        Case COMP/M.3998 – Axalto/GemPlus, paragraph 24.
9        Case COMP/M.6164 – Barclays Bank/Egg credit card assets, paragraph 9.
10       Case COMP/M.7078 – Santander Consumer Finance, El Corte Ingles, Financiera El Corte Inglés,
         paragraphs 22 – 23; Case COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas /Fortis, paragraphs 14 and 16-40; Case No
         COMP/M.6164 – Barclays Bank/ Egg credit card assets, paragraphs 9 – 12.
11       Case COMP/M.7241 – Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding, paragraph 30.
                                                     4

24)    The Notifying Parties submit that any hypothetical market for the provision of
       merchant acquiring for online merchants would be at least EEA-wide, if not
       worldwide.
25)    In any event, for the purpose of this Decision, the exact geographic market definition
       for merchant acquiring services can be left open as the Transaction does not give rise
       to serious doubts as regards its compatibility with the internal market irrespective of
       the precise market definition.
4.2.2.     Manufacturing and supply of smart payment cards
26)    In previous decisions, the Commission considered that the manufacturing and supply
       of smart payment cards is national in scope due to a general distinction between
       countries that have adopted standards providing for the use of chips (together with
       other security features) and those that have not.12
27)    The Notifying Parties submit that the supply of smart payment cards has evolved since
       the Commission's previous assessment almost 10 years ago, as the growing trend
       towards technological harmonisation is gradually moving the sector towards an EEA-
       wide or even global market. In particular, there have been significant advancements in
       smart card technology, and greater use of EEA-wide standards. Indeed, payment cards
       in all Member States now incorporate worldwide standardised EMV chips13 and
       increasingly are using standardised contactless technology.
28)    In any event, for the purpose of this Decision, the exact geographic market definition
       for manufacturing and supply of smart payment cards can be left open as the
       Transaction does not give rise to serious doubts as regards its compatibility with the
       internal market irrespective of the precise market definition.
4.2.3.     Card issuing
29)    In previous decisions, the Commission considered that the market for card issuing
       (and any segment therein) is national in scope.14
30)    The Notifying Parties do not contest the previous assessment of the Commission.
31)    In the light of the above, the Commission considers it appropriate to assess the market
       for card issuing at the national level.
12       Case COMP/M.3998 – Axalto/GemPlus, paragraph 34.
13       In Italy, the EMV standard has been adopted and, while Italian implementation (as certified by the
         Association of Italian Banks) differs slightly, it nonetheless complies with the international EMV
         standard adopted by Visa and MasterCard.
14       Case COMP/M.7078 – Santander Consumer Finance/El Corte Ingles/Financiera El Corte Inglés,
         paragraphs 49-51; Case COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas/Fortis, paragraph 73; Case COMP/M.6164 –
         Barclays Bank/ Egg credit card assets, paragraph 17.
                                                           5

4.3.       Competition assessment
4.3.1.     Horizontal effects
4.3.1.1. Merchant acquiring services
32)    The Transaction gives rise to a horizontally affected market in relation to the provision
       of merchant acquiring services in Italy. No affected markets arise at the EEA level
       under any possible product market sub-segmentation.
33)    In the EU, ICBPI is active only in Italy (outside the EU, ICBPI is also active in San
       Marino). It has a customer base largely comprised of local brick-and-mortar
       merchants that do not have any significant global online presence.
34)    According to the Notifying Parties, […]* is active almost exclusively in the UK and
       does not target merchants located outside the UK and Ireland.15 As a result, […]*
       generates revenues outside the UK and Ireland only where a UK or Irish merchant has
       specifically requested Worldpay to provide a uniform solution across the merchant’s
       retail platform and online presence, or in a specific territory. Furthermore, Worldpay
       has no physical presence or POS terminals in Italy and generates revenues from a
       small number of primarily UK and Irish customers.16
35)    Similarly, Nets is active mainly in the Nordic region and does not target merchants
       located in Italy. Consequently, Nets has only negligible sales of merchant acquiring
       services to merchants in Italy, generating net revenue of only around €[…] in 2014
       from only [description of customers]. Nets has no physical presence or POS terminals
       in Italy, and has no plans to expand into Italy.
36)    Given that Worldpay and Nets' market shares in Italy are always [0-5]% the increment
       brought about by the Transaction is negligible in all affected markets.
15       Until now many merchant (payment card) acquirers have been primarily serving customers in the
         Member States where they set up subsidiaries. It is unprofitable for acquirers to serve customers in
         other Member States since they (and indirectly retailers) would have to pay the (higher) interchange
         fee of the Member State of the retailer. This situation is likely to change for all merchant acquirers
         after the entry into force of Regulation (EU) 2015/751 on interchange fees for card-based payment
         transactions (the "Regulation") as all interchange fees for consumer card payments will be capped as
         of December 2015. As a result of the Regulation, all merchant acquirers established outside of Italy
         will have an equal opportunity to target merchants located in Italy. There is, however, no indication
         that the Transaction could remove a significant potential competitor in Italy.
16       Worldpay is active on the Italian market for the provision of merchant acquiring services via its
         eCommerce business, which is a multi-scheme, multi-currency and multi-payment processing
         operation that provides online merchants with a pan-European or global service. Customers generally
         have global or internet-focused activities, and generally contract with Worldpay centrally in the UK.
*        Should read Wordpay UK
                                                            6


       5]%-[5-10]%, depending on the exact product market definition), and BNL (market
       share ranging between [0-5]%-[5-10]%, depending on the exact product market
       definition).19
39)    In view of the small increment and strong competitive landscape, the Transaction does
       not give rise to serious doubts in relation to merchant acquiring (and its sub-segments)
       in Italy or in the EEA.
4.3.2.     Vertical links
4.3.2.1. Manufacturing and supply of smart payment cards (upstream) and card issuing
           (downstream)
40)    The Transaction gives rise to a vertically affected market between the manufacturing
       and supply of smart payment cards (upstream) by Oberthur (portfolio company of
       Advent International) and the card issuing (downstream) by ICBPI.
41)    Upstream, Oberthur has a market share on the market for manufacturing and supply of
       payment cards of [20-30]% (based on volume)20 and [20-30]% (based on value)21 at
       the EEA level, and of [30-40]% (based on volume) and [30-40]% (based on value) in
       Italy. Oberthur competes with various smart card suppliers, such as GemAlto ([30-
       40]% market share at the EEA level and [30-40]% in Italy), G&D ([10-20]% market
       share at the EEA level and [10-20]% in Italy), Morpho ([5-10]% market share at the
       EEA level) and Incard ([10-20]% market share in Italy).22
42)    ICBPI has a market share of [10-20]% (based on volume)23 on the overall market for
       card issuing in Italy. As regards narrower plausible markets for card issuing, the
       market shares of ICBPI (based on volume) are ranging between [30-40]% and [40-
       50]% in Italy.24 However, for the purpose of the assessment of the customer
       foreclosure strategy, it is more appropriate to take into consideration the overall
       market for card issuing as (i) the suppliers of smart payment cards generally
       manufacture all types of cards and there is one overall (upstream) market for the
       supply of smart payment cards, (ii) the manufacturing of smart payment cards does
       not differ according to different card segments,25 as those segments are based on
       differences in customer group, rather than differences in the physical nature of the
19       The market shares for 2013.
20       Volume based market shares correspond to the number of cards supplied by the manufacturer.
21       Value based market shares correspond to the value of the smart payment cards supplied by the
         manufacturer.
22       Market shares of the competitors are based on volume.
23       The market shares are based on volume – number of supplied and issued cards better reflects
         relationship between the upstream market for the supply of smart payment cards (on the one hand)
         and the downstream market for the card issuance (on the other hand) and is therefore more
         appropriate for the assessment of the vertical foreclosure strategies in the present case; as regards the
         card issuing, value data are based on the value of transactions carried out by cardholders using the
         cards, something that is not relevant to ICBPI’s importance as a customer of smart payment cards.
24       ICBPI does not issue debit cards and special purpose cards.
25       That is debit vs. credit/charge cards, universal/hybrid store credit cards vs. special purpose credit
         cards, and personal vs. corporate cards.
                                                            8

      card used, (iii) card issuing companies purchase and issue, with some exceptions, all
      types of smart payment cards.
43)   Based on value26, the main card issuers in Italy include ICBPI ([20-30]%), Intesa
      Sanpaolo ([10-20]%), UniCredit ([10-20]%) and Poste Italiane ([5-10]%).
    Input foreclosure
44)   Oberthur on the upstream market faces competition from other significant suppliers
      such as GemAlto, G&D and Morpho who could all supply ICBPI's competitors on the
      downstream market; therefore, any attempt of Oberthur to engage in an input
      foreclosure strategy would be unprofitable. In addition, according to the Notifying
      Parties, the customers purchasing smart payment cards are powerful customers (banks
      that perform card issuing services in-house, or third-party card issuers that provide
      card issuing to banks on an outsourced basis), able to easily switch suppliers and
      typically engage in multi-sourcing. In addition, there are no exclusive or long-term
      supply contracts, as a result of which switching to alternative new suppliers is easy, in
      all cases possible within two or three months.27
45)   As a result, it is unlikely that the merged entity would have the ability or the incentive
      to engage into an input foreclosure strategy.
    Customer foreclosure
46)   The Notifying Parties submit that ICBPI currently purchases around […]% of its
      smart payment card requirements from [supplier of smart payment cards] and only
      […]% from Oberthur.28
47)   In addition, ICBPI' market position on the downstream market is limited and as such it
      is not an important customer of smart payment cards in Italy. Moreover, upstream
      suppliers compete on a wider market for card manufacturing, including other types of
      cards and thus have other outlets for their cards than issuers of smart payment cards.
      Therefore, even if the merged entity would internalize all current demand of ICBPI's
      cards in Italy, this is unlikely to have any significant impact on Obertur's competitors
      upstream who could easily find other customers. In addition, given the tendency
      towards technological harmonisation on the upstream market, the sector is gradually
      moving towards an EEA-wide or even global scope and therefore Italy represents only
      a small outlet for the EEA suppliers (manufactures) of smart payments cards.
48)   As a result, is unlikely that the merged entity would have the ability or the incentive to
      engage into a customer foreclosure strategy.
26      Value based market share is based on point of sale (POS) and cash advance billed transaction value
        (excluding domestic debit ATM cash withdrawals). The Notifying Parties were not able to provide
        market shares of ICBPI's competitors (card issuers) based on volume.
27      This is in the line with the assessment in a previous decision of the Commission. See case
        COMP/M.3998 – Axalto/GemPlus, paragraph 43.
28      [details of supply arrangements].
                                                         9

    Conclusion
49)  In light of the above, the Commission concludes that the Transaction does not give
     rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in relation to the
     horizontal link regarding the provision of merchant acquiring services in Italy and
     vertical link between the manufacturing and supply of smart payment cards
     (upstream) and card issuing (downstream).
5.      CONCLUSION
50)  For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
     notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
     EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
     Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                      For the Commission
                                                      (Signed)
                                                      Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                      Member of the Commission
                                                 10
