                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 11.7.1996
                                                              PUBLIC VERSION
                                                               MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                               ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                            To the notifying party
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.771 - AMB/Rodutch
             Your notification of 21/06/96 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No
             4064/89
1.     On 21.06.1996 the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
       pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation no 4064/89 by which the German insurance
       undertaking, Aachener und Münchener Beteiligungs-Aktiengesellschaft (AMB), will
       acquire sole control of the Dutch insurance undertaking, Rodutch Holdings BV
       (Rodutch).
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and does not raise any
       serious doubts as to its compatibility with the Common Market and with the functioning
       of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
3.     AMB is a German undertaking whose principal activities are related to life and non-life
       insurance in Germany and in other EU countries. AMB is also engaged in the financial
       services sector and in real estate operations.
4.     Rodutch is a holding company which is active in the Dutch life and non-life insurance
       business. Rodutch conducts its life and non-life insurance businesses in the Netherlands
       through its subsidiaries, Royal Levensverzekering NV and Royal Nederland
       Schadeverzekering NV, respectively.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

                                                2
II.  CONCENTRATION
5.   Prior to the notified operation, Rodutch was jointly controlled by AMB and the British
     insurance undertaking, Royal Insurance plc (Royal), with shareholdings of 66.66% and
     33.33% respectively, through a vehicle holding company, namely European Partners for
     Insurance Cooperation S.A. (Epic). In spite of AMB's majority shareholding in Epic this
     latter company was effectively jointly controlled by AMB and Royal since decisions on
     strategical matters such as the business plan and budget of Epic required the consent of
     both shareholders.
6.   By the present operation AMB and Royal enter into a share sale and purchase agreement
     according to which AMB will acquire the 33.33% shareholding Royal held in Epic.
     AMB will therefore become the sole owner of Epic and will therefore acquire sole
     control of Rodutch, a 100% subsidiary of Epic.
7.   The present operation therefore deals with a change from joint control to sole control by
     AMB on Rodutch through Epic. A change from joint control to sole control is deemed
     to be a concentration under the Merger Regulation since the quality of decisive influence
     exercised solely is substantially different from decisive influence exercised jointly, since
     the latter has to take into account the potentially different interest of the other party or
     parties concerned.
     Therefore the notified operation is a concentration in the sense of the Merger Regulation.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8.   The aggregate worldwide turnover of AMB and Rodutch, calculated in accordance with
     Article 5(3)b of the Merger Regulation, exceeded in 1995 5 billion ECU (AMB = 8,016
     Million ECU; Rodutch = 514 Million ECU). The aggregate community wide turnover
     of each of the two undertakings amounted the same year to more than 250 Million ECU
     and the two companies did not achieve more than two thirds of their aggregate
     community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. Therefore the
     concentration has a community dimension.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
9.   The relevant product markets concerned by the notified operation are life and non-life
     insurance since the target company, Rodutch, only carries out activities in these product
     markets.
10. As far as life and non-life insurance are concerned, the Commission has so far
     consistently considered in previous decisions that geographical reference markets are still,
     at present, predominantly national in scope in view, inter alia, of the established market
     structures, the need for adequate distribution channels, fiscal constraints and differing
     national systems of regulatory supervision.
11. The activities of Rodutch in life and non-life insurance are exclusively limited to the
     territory of the Netherlands where Rodutch has a total market share of less than 3% (life
     and non-life insurance combined). Furthermore, Rodutch's market share does not exceed
     10% in any segment of the life and non-life insurance sectors within the Netherlands.

                                              3
12. AMB has significant life and non-life insurance operations in Germany, as well as in
    other E.U. countries, but does not have any activities in these markets in the Netherlands,
    except for its shareholding in Rodutch.
13. Therefore, the proposed operation will not give rise to any overlap of activities between
    AMB and Rodutch and consequently there will be no addition of market shares in the
    Dutch insurance markets.
V.  ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
14. The parties have requested that Article 7 of the share sale and purchase agreement, which
    provides that Royal must not compete with Rodutch or any member of the Rodutch
    Group in the Netherlands for a period not exceeding 2 years after the entering into force
    of the agreement, be considered as ancillary.
15. The covenant not to compete is directly related and necessary to the concentration as it
    is intended to vest in AMB as sole shareholder of Rodutch the exclusive right to do
    business in the Netherlands insurance market through Rodutch with the benefit of the
    entire goodwill and know-how of Rodutch on this market. Therefore, this provision of
    Article 7 shall be considered as ancillary to the concentration.
VI. CONCLUSION
16. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the Common Market and with the functioning of the
    EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                       For the Commission,
