                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                              Brussels, 14.3.2017
                                                              C(2017) 1814 final
 In the published version of this decision, some
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article                    PUBLIC VERSION
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.
                                                              To the notifying party:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case M.7873 – Worldline / Equens / Paysquare
                Approval of BNPP (in conjunction with SIX) as purchaser of the
                Paysquare Divestment Business following your letter of 30 January 2017
                and the Trustee’s opinion of 24 February 2017
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURE
1.      By decision of 20 April 2016 (the "Decision") based on Article 6(1)(b) in
        connection with Article 6(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 of 20
        January 2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings (the "Merger
        Regulation") the Commission declared the operation by which Worldline S.A.
        ("Worldline") ultimately controlled by Atos S.E. acquired sole control over Equens
        S.E. ("Equens"), including its subsidiary Paysquare, compatible with the internal
        market following modification by subject to conditions and obligations (the
        "Commitments").
2.      As part of the Committments, Worldline committed to divest Paysquare's merchant
        acquiring business in Belgium, including its client portfolio, key assets and key
        personnel as detailed in Schedule 1 of the Commitments (the "Divestment
        Business") to a suitable purchaser.
3.      By letter of 30 January 2017, Worldline proposed BNP Paribas Fortis ("BNPPF")
        for approval by the Commission as purchaser of the Divestment Business and
        submitted the proposed Sale and Purchase Agreement (signed on 21 December
        2016) as well as the Interim Service Agreement (signed on 27 January 2017)
        (together, the "Proposed Agreements").
4.      In Belgium, BNPPF acts an agent of SIX Payment Service (Europe) S.A. Europe
        ("SIX") on the Belgian merchant acquiring market on the basis of a partnership
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu

     established between the two companies in 2014. On 31 January 2017, Mazars (the
     "Trustee") informed the Commission that, in view of this partnership, the acquiring
     operations with the merchants that are part of the Divestment Business will be
     transferred, together with the right to acquire, to SIX. On these premises, it was
     considered appropriate to conduct an assessment SIX's independence and
     suitability as a buyer, in addition to the assessment of BNPPF.
5.   On 8 February 2017, the Trustee submitted an assessment of BNPPF’s suitability
     as a purchaser (in conjunction with SIX) and, in particular, indicated that both
     companies fulfil the criteria of the purchaser requirements in Section I.C. of the
     Commitments attached to the Decision. In this assessment, the Trustee also
     indicated that, on the basis of the Proposed Agreements, the Divestment Business
     would be sold in a manner consistent with the Commitments. The final version of
     the Trustee's reasoned opinion (the "Reasoned Opinion") was submitted on 24
     February 2017.
II. ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPOSAL
6.   As set in Section I.C. of the Commitments, in order to be approved by the
     Commission, the Purchaser must fulfil the following criteria:
           a. The Purchaser shall be independent of and unconnected to Worldline and
               its Affiliated Undertakings (this being assessed having regard to the
               situation following the divestiture);
           b. The Purchaser shall have the financial resources, proven expertise and
               incentive to maintain and develop the Divestment Business as a viable and
               active competitive force in competition with the Parties and other market
               players;
           c. The acquisition of the Divestment Business by the Purchaser must neither
               be likely to create, in light of the information available to the
               Commission, prima facie competition concerns nor does it give rise to a
               risk that the implementation of the Commitments will be delayed. In
               particular, the Purchaser must reasonably be expected to obtain all
               necessary approvals from the relevant regulatory authorities for the
               acquisition of the Divestment Business.
7.   This section provides a description of BNPFF (the "Purchaser") as well as an
     assessment of its suitability as a buyer (taking its partnership with SIX into
     account). In view of the partnership with the proposed purchaser BNPPF in
     Belgium and its consequent inherent connection with the acquisition of the
     Divestment Business, this section will also provide a description of SIX and an
     assessment of its independence from Worldine.
Description of the Purchaser
8.   BNPPF, i.e. the Purchaser of the business, is part of the BNPP Group, one of the
     largest banking groups in Europe and is 99.94% owned by BNP Paribas SA. BNPP
     Group's main areas of activity are Retail Banking & Services (RBS) and Corporate
     Institutional Banking (CIB). BNPP's turnover at group level in 2015 amounted to
     EUR 42.9 billion (with a net profit of EUR 6.7 billion); it employed 190,480 staff
     in 2015. BNPFF covers the BNPP Group's RBS and CIB activities in Belgium.
                                                  2

9.     SIX is a subsidiary of SIX Group Ltd., an unlisted public limited company
       domiciled in Switzerland with its registered office in Zurich, which provides a wide
       range of services in various areas of the financial sector, including securities
       trading and post-trading, financial information processing and cashless payment
       transactions. SIX describes itself as the market leader in the card business in
       Switzerland, Luxembourg and Austria and offers transborder acquiring and issuing
       services in Europe. SIX processes approximately 9.3 million transactions each day
       and holds licences of all major card brands.
       a.     Independence
Independence of BNPPF
10.    There are no cross-shareholdings between BNPFF and Worldline. In addition, there
       are no joint ventures or entities in which both BNPPF and Worldline have a share
       interest. Finally, there is no cross membership in the management boards of
       BNPFF and Worldline.
11.    As regards the commercial relationships between the two companies, Worldline
       supplies certain services to BNPP (including to BNPFF),1 generating revenues for
       approximately EUR […].
12.    Revenues stemming specifically from the contracts between Worldline and BNPFF
       in Belgium amounted to approximately EUR […] in 2015.2 These revenues mostly
       consist of issuing processing (for credit and debit cards) and related services.
       Contracts between Worldline and BNPFF will end in […]. The Trustee considers
       that, based on its review, these contracts appear to be normal course client/supplier
       contracts that are unlikely to undermine the independence of the two companies.
       More specifically, BNPFF usually insources the services that are provided to it by
       Worldline on the basis of these contracts and could, in any event, also easily source
       these services from other large issuing processors that are active in Belgium or
       neighbouring markets such as Germany and the Netherlands. Finally, the value of
       these contracts is minimal if compared to the turnover of Worldline and BNPFF
       (for the latter, around [0-5]% of its global turnover).
13.    In view of the above, the Commission considers that there are no structural links or
       material commercial links that could cast doubts on BNPFF's independence from
       Worldline. Therefore, based on the information provided, the Commission
       considers BNPPF to be independent of and unconnected to Worldline.
Independence of SIX
14.    There are no cross-shareholdings between Worldline and SIX. In addition, there
       are no joint ventures in place between the two companies. Finally, there is no cross
       membership in the management boards of SIX and Worldline.
1   […].
2   The remaining EUR […] are generated by Worldline in relation to commercial contracts with the
    BNPP outside Belgium and relate to various services provided by Worldline to BNPP including
    acquiring processing, internet payment, issuing processing, online banking and payment software
    licencing.
                                                      3

15.   With respect to the existing commercial relationships between the two companies,
      Worldline is one of SIX's suppliers of POS terminals both in the EEA and
      worldlwide.3 Based on the information submitted by Worldline to the Trustee, SIX
      has been distributing Worldline (formerly Banksys) terminals since the 1990s. The
      arrangements between the two companies were formalised in a distribution
      agreement that was concluded in 2013.4 This agreement can be terminated by both
      parties subject to an 18 months notice; it does not impose any volume commitment
      on SIX that, in any event, has contracts in place with other terminal suppliers. In
      any event, revenues generated by Worldline from these contracts and the value of
      the supply contract with Worldline is nearly insignificant if compared with
      Worldline's 2015 turnover and SIX's 2015 operating income respectively (in the
      range of 1% in both instances).
16.   In view of the above, the Commission considers that there are no structural links or
      material commercial links that could significantly undermine SIX' independence
      from Worldline. Therefore, based on the information provided, the Commission
      considers SIX to be independent of and unconnected to Worldline.
      b.      Financial resources, proven expertise and incentive to maintain and
              develop the Divestment Business as a viable and active competitive force
                                i. Financial resources
17.   As one of the largest banks in Belgium, BNPPF has a solid balance sheet and has
      experienced a growth in revenues from 2014 to 2015 (from approximately EUR 7
      billion to approximately EUR 7.23 billion) This growth trend appears to have been
      confirmed by the results of 2016 (EUR 3.6 billion in the first half of 2016).
18.   BNPPF received an A rating (more specifically A/Stable Outlook/A-1) from rating
      agency Standard & Poor's ("S&P") and hence is considered (under the S&P
      definitions) to have a "strong capacity to meet its financial commitments".
19.   The purchase price5 that BNPFF has agreed to pay for the Divestment Business
      (including the assumption of liabilities) amounts to EUR […]. The expected
      investments / project costs amount to EUR […] (of which EUR […] in 2017). It is
      evident that, compared the overall financial resources available to BPNPP, both the
      purchase price that BNPFF for the Divestment Business and the expected
      investments that will be required are insignificant and can be paid in their entirety
      out of BNPP's cash resources.
20.   Based on the above, the Commission considers BNPFF to have the sufficient
      resources to complete the transaction and to maintain and develop the Divestment
      Business as a viable and active competitive force.
3   SIX also supplies terminals from other providers in the EEA, namely Ingenico and Verifone.
4   Adjacent contracts for the provision of certain ancillary terminal management services ("Xenturion"
    application and other repair services) are in place between SIX and Worldline. The revenues generated
    by Worldline from these services amount to approximately [5-10]% of Worldline's sales generated
    with SIX.
5   This price includes VAT.
                                                          4

                         ii. Proven expertise
21. BNPPF is one of the largest banks in Belgium and has therefore not only the
    financial capacity, but also a natural expertise and insight in the Belgian payments
    sector, holding a licence for the issuance of Bancontact, Visa & Mastercard
    payment cards and issuing several products under this license. BNPFF is also the
    legal issuer of the electronic money for its prepaid cards and has launched an e-
    commerce offering in 2016.
22. BNPPF is a relatively recent entrant in the merchant acquiring market in Belgium.
    It entered the market in 2014 through the establishment of a partnership with SIX.
    Under this technical and commercial partnership (which is still in place), BNPPF
    acts as an agent of SIX and perfoms a commercial role towards clients/merchants,
    while SIX holds the acquiring licence and carries out the processing of the
    transactions.
23. It follows that, although not currently holding an acquiring licence in Belgium,
    BNPPF can rely on a very experienced partner to manage the technical aspects of
    the contracts with the merchants, most importantly the processing of the
    transactions. The merchants included in the Divestment Business will be serviced
    under the scheme licence of SIX and on its platform.
24. While BNPPF still holds a low market share in the merchant acquiring market in
    Belgium, it has been continuously attracting new customers since its entry, both
    through its partnership with SIX and thanks to its own efforts.
25. Based on the above, the Commission considers that BNPFF, especially in view its
    partnership with SIX, which is a very experienced player in the merchant acquiring
    space also in terms of technical capabilities, has the proven expertise to maintain
    and develop the Divestment Business as a viable and active competitive force in
    competition with the merged entity and other competitors.
                        iii. Incentive to maintain and develop the Divested Business as
                             a viable and active competitor
26. The acquisition of the Divestment Business fits with BNPPF's plans to expand its
    activities in the Belgian merchant acquiring market. This expansion plan is also
    coherent with the strategy implemented by BNPP at group level in other European
    countries.
27. The acquisition of the Divestment Business provides BNPPF with an opportunity
    to significantly increase its presence on the Belgian market and to integrate its
    Belgian merchant acquiring business with the Divestment Business' client portfolio
    which is more than three times larger than BNPFF's current portfolio (in terms of
    transaction volume).
28. In addition, the acquisition will allow BNPPF to reach and gain visibility with new
    customers (especially large merchants) with a view to increase its overall
    profitability by offering them not only merchant acquiring services, but also
    BNPFF's overall range of bank products.
29. BNPFF has developed detailed plans to achieve its targets in relation to the
    acquisition of the Divestment Business, as well as a detailed migration plan for the
                                               5

      Divestment Business which covers the period from Day 1 to the first four months
      after the acquisition has closed (when the migration is expected to be completed).
30.   Based on the above, the Commission considers that BNPPF has the incentive to
      maintain and develop the Divestment Business as a competitive business.
      c.     Absence of prima facie competition problems
31.   Based on the information provided by the Notifying Party in the Form CO and as
      acknowledged by the Commission in its Decision dated 20 April 2016, in the
      market for merchant acquiring in Belgium, Worldline has a market share between
      85 and 90%.
32.   On the other hand, BNPFF is a recent entrant and, through its partnership with SIX,
      has a market share of approximately [0-5]%-[0-5]% in the Belgian merchant
      acquiring market. In the same market, the Divestment Business holds a similar
      market share, i.e. approximately [0-5]%.
33.   Finally, BNPPF confirmed to the Trustee, that its is not subject to any restrictions
      stemming from its State aid restructuring plan of 12 May 2009; notably, its
      acquisition ban expired on 12 May 2013.
34.   On this basis, no prima facie concern arises in the EEA.
35.   This prima facie assessment is based on the information available for the purpose
      of this buyer approval and does not prejudge the competition assessment of the
      acquisition of the Divestment Business stemming from a a deeper enquiry by a
      competent competition authority under applicable merger control rules, including
      the Commission.
III. ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPOSED AGREEMENTS
36.   The Sale and Purchase Agreeement ("SPA") was signed between Worldline and
      BNPFF on 21 December 2016. On 27 January 2017, Worldline and BNPFF signed
      the final Interim Service Agreement ("ISA") (the two agreements together are
      referred hereinafter as the "Proposed Agreements").
37.   The Trustee has reviewed and provided an assessment of the Proposed Agreements,
      and concluded that both agreements generally fulfil the requirements of the
      Commitments and the condition of the Commitments to transfer the Divestment
      Business to a suitable purchaser. However, in the Reasoned Opinion, the Trustee
      highlighted the following issues:
            a. Non-compete clause. Paragraph 6 of the Commitments provides for a non-
                compete period of five (5) years after closing, during which Worldline
                shall not neither directly approach nor directly contract with the customers
                of the Diverstment business. The SPA between Worldline and BNPFF,
                however, only includes a non-compete clause of the duration of two (2)
                years. The Trustee reports that, upon its specific enquiry on the
                inconsistency described above, Worldline responded that BNPFF had only
                requested to include two (2) year non-compete during the negotiations of
                the SPA, suggesting that this clause was the results of the discussions
                between the Parties. According to Worldline, in any event, the
                Commitments were sufficient to bind Worldline to a 5 (five)-year non-
                compete clause. The Trustee, in agreement with the Commission,
                                                 6

           considered that the non-compete clause as included in the SPA was non
           consistent with the Committments and that merely invocating the
           Commitments text was not sufficient to comply with the 5 (five) year non-
           compete obligation undertaken by Worldline. By letter dated 7 March
           2017 signed by both Worldline and BNPPF, Worldline committed to a
           customer non-solicit obligation of 5 years, pursuant to the Commitments.
        b. Termination of for “material breach” of the ISA. The Trustee reports
           that, under the ISA, BNPFF has the right to terminate the ISA for
           convenience, while both parties to the agreement have the right to
           terminate the agreement in case of (i) material breach of the agreement
           with a failure to remediate the breach in 15 calendar days; (ii) material
           breach of a major obligation under the ISA which is not capable of being
           remedied (the concept of “major obligation” is not specifically defined in
           the ISA); (iii) insolvency of one of the parties and (iv) requirement of the
           regulator. In its Reasoned Opinion, the Trustee noted that, while the
           clauses on the termination for material breach are generally usual and
           legitimate clauses, the termination right of Worldine should not
           undermine its obligation under the Commitments to offer a service
           agreement to the purchaser. The Trustee, therefore, requested Worldline to
           agree to send a copy of any breach notices under the ISA also to the
           Trustee to avoid the situation whereby Worldline would terminate the ISA
           for a breach by BNPFF without the Trustee being informed. By letter
           dated 7 March 2017 signed by Worldline and BNPFF, Worldline
           committed to inform the Trustee should such instances occur.
        c. Best efforts to procure customers' consent. The Trustee notes that the SPA
           does not contain a provision reflecting paragraph 5 of the Commitments
           which provides that Worldline will employ its best effors to procure
           customer's consent (with regards to customer contracts requiring the
           customer's consent to be transferred to a third party). Although the
           Trustee takes the view in its Reasoned Opinion that none of the other
           provisions of the SPA prevents Worldline from complying with this
           specific commitment, the Commission considers that this provision is
           relevant to ensure that a maximum number of contracts is transferred. By
           letter dated 7 March 2017 signed by Worldline and BNPFF, Worldline
           specifically committed to employ its best efforts to procure the customer
           consent pursuant to paragraph 5 of the Commitments.
        d. Non-solicitation of key personnel (territorial limitation). In its Reasoned
           Opinion, the Trustee notes that clause 14.1 of the SPA (non-solicitation of
           key personnel) is not in line with the wording of paragraph 17 of the
           Commitments as it contains a territorial limitation (Belgium) as regards
           the obligation not to solicit the two individuals identified as key personnel
           other than the Hold Separate Manager ("HSM"). Upon request by the
           Commission, by letter dated 7 March 2017 signed by Worldline and
           BNPFF waived the territorial limitation included in the SPA.
38. Based on the above, the Commission concludes that the Divestment Business is
    being sold in a manner consistent with the Commitments.
                                              7

IV. CONCLUSION
39.  On the basis of the above assessment, the Commission approves BNPPF (in
     conjunction with SIX) as a suitable purchaser for the above-mentioned reasons.
40.  On the basis of the Proposed Agreement, the Commission further concludes that
     the Divestment Business is being sold in a manner consistent with the
     Commitments.
41.  This decision only constitutes approval of the proposed purchaser identified herein
     and of the Proposed Agreements. This decision does not constitute a confirmation
     that Worldline has complied with its Commitments.
42.  This decision is based on paragraphs 22 and 23 of the Commitments attached to the
     Commission Decision of 20 April 2016.
                                                    For the Commission
                                                    (Signed)
                                                    Johannes LAITENBERGER
                                                    Director-General
                                              8
 <<--NEW VERSION-->>                                 EUROPEAN COMMISSION
  In the published version of this decision, some                Brussels, 20.4.2016
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article               C(2016) 2470 final
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information                        PUBLIC VERSION
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or
  a general description.
To the notifying parties:
Dear Madam(s) and/or Sir(s),
Subject:        Case M.7873 – Worldline / Equens / Paysquare
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) in conjunction with Article
                6(2) of Council Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the
                European Economic Area2
(1)     On 26 February 2016, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
        concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which Worldline S.A.
        ("Worldline" France), ultimately controlled by Atos S.E. ("Atos", France) acquires within
        the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation control of the whole of Equens S.E.,
        including its subsidiary PaySquare (together "Equens", the Netherlands), by way of purchase
        of shares.3 (the 'Transaction'; Atos and Worldline are hereinafter referred as the 'Notifying
        Party' and Atos, Worldline and Equens collectively as the 'Parties'.)
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 ('the Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on the
          Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the replacement of
          'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of the TFEU will be
          used throughout this decision.
2         OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p.3 ("the EEA Agreement").
3         Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 089, 05.03.2016, p. 10.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

I.     THE PARTIES
(2) Worldline is a société anonyme à conseil d'administration incorporated under the laws of
    France and listed on the Paris Euronext market. Worldline is active in the payments and
    transactional services industry. Its activities are organised around three business lines: (i)
    Merchant Services & Terminals, which primarily targets merchants and is organized in
    four business divisions, namely merchant acquiring, online services, private label card &
    loyalty programs and terminals; (ii) Financial Processing & Software Licensing
    ("FPLiS") targeting banks and financial institutions, which is comprised of Worldline's
    acquiring processing, online banking, issuing processing and payment software licensing
    business divisions and (iii) Mobility & e-Transactional Services, with its three business
    divisions, i.e. e-Ticketing, e-Government collection and e-Consumer and mobility.
    Worldline is active in the EEA and in emerging markets such as India, China and certain
    countries in Asia and Latin America. Worldline is solely controlled by Atos.4
(3) Atos is a global digital service provider, incorporated as a Societas Europea under the
    laws of France and listed on the Euronext Paris market. Atos provides Consulting &
    Systems Integration services, Managed Services & Business Process Outsourcing, Cloud
    operations, Big Data & Cyber-security solutions, as well as transactional services through
    Worldline.
(4) Equens is a payment service provider, active in Finland, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands
    and the United Kingdom as a Societas Europea incorporated under the laws of the
    Netherlands. Equens offers a complete service portfolio covering the full value of chain
    of both payments processing and cards processing services.
(5) PaySquare, a fully-owned subsidiary of Equens, is a provider of merchant acquiring
    services active in Belgium, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Switzerland
    and the United Kingdom. In particular, merchants can use PaySquare to accept, process
    and make payments for payment cards. As its parent company Equens, PaySquare is also
    organised as a Societas Europaea incorporated under the laws of the Netherlands.
    PaySquare owns a 100% subsidiary, BD-POS GmbH, focusing on payment terminal
    management and services.
II.    THE OPERATION
(6) The Transaction, implemented through two interrelated5 transactions, consists in the
    acquisition by Worldline, through one of its fully-owned subsidiaries in the Netherlands
    (Atos group), of:
                a) sole control over Equens' fully owned subsidiary, PaySquare;
                b) sole control (63.6% of the share capital and voting rights) over Equens6 in
                     consideration of the contribution by Worldline of part of its Financial
                     Processing & Software Licensing business line ("FPLiS") and of the team
                     and activities related to the processing of Worldline Benelux card payment
4     Atos has a 70.34% share in Worldline.
5     […].
6     Equens S.E., excluding PaySquare, once FPLiS and the team and activities related to the processing of
      Worldline Benelux card payment merchant acquiring have been contributed to Equens.
                                                      2

                         merchant acquiring. The remainder of Equens' shares will be held by
                         Equens’ current shareholders.7
(7)   Following the Transaction, and as illustrated in Figure 1 below, Atos will be the ultimate
      controlling entity of Equens.
Figure 1 – Overview of the Transaction
[...]
Source: Notifying Party, Form CO
(8)   Therefore, the Transaction constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article
      3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
III.      EU DIMENSION
(9)   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
      than EUR 5 000 million8 (Worldline/Atos: EUR […] million, Equens including
      Paysquare EUR 357 million). Each of them has a EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR
      250 million (Worldline/Atos: EUR […] million, Equens including Paysquare EUR 357
      million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide
      turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified operation has therefore a
      EU dimension.
IV.        COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
IV.1.     Introduction and the Parties' activities
(10) The Transaction combines two large operators in the payment systems space. The Parties'
      activities mainly9 overlap in relation to card payment systems. This section therefore aims
      to provide a brief description of those.
(11) Card payment systems allow a cardholder to use a card (e.g. a credit or debit card) in
      order to pay for a product or a service without using cash. They connect merchants to
      financial institutions to cover the whole transaction from the moment the client pays at
      the point of sale ("POS") until the moment the merchant account is credited.
(12) The chart below illustrates some of the key steps and the main players involved in a
      typical card payment transaction.
7       […].
8       Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
        Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
9       Further overlaps arise for example as regards the Parties' activities as processors for SEPA direct debit
        and credit transfer transactions. As no affected markets arise in this regard, unless if the processing of
        iDEAL transaction would form part of these markets, these will not be assessed in the present Decision,
        except for in the section on iDEAL processing (section IV.2.3.1) .
                                                           3

     Figure 2 – Overview of a payment transaction
     Source: Notifying Party
(13) An electronic card payment transaction usually begins with cardholders using a card to
     purchase goods or services from a merchant, which seeks the merchant acquirer's
     authorization for the transaction. The authorisation request is initiated from the
     merchant's card reader (a POS terminal) and is transmitted to the acquiring processor via
     an electronic network. The acquiring processor identifies the card payment system to
     which the card belongs and transmits the authorization request to the issuing processor,
     which checks if the card is valid and sometimes the limit on the card holder's account.
     The answer is transmitted back to the terminal within seconds via the network. If the
     transaction is authorised, the merchant can be sure of payment and will hand over the
     merchandise or deliver the service to the client.
(14) With some variations across countries, (card) payment systems, and companies, most
     players in this space are active in various stages of this process. With respect to the
     Transaction, the Parties' activities overlap in particular with regard to the following steps:
         <U+F0B7>   Merchant acquiring: these services essentially enable merchants to accept
             payment cards at their POS terminals. Merchant acquirers sign contracts with
             merchants/retailers (who are thus customers of merchant acquirers), maintain the
             merchant-customer relationship and ensure that merchants are paid for their sales
             through cards;
         <U+F0B7>   acquiring processing: the merchant-oriented side of technically processing a
             transaction. It includes the network routing of payments toward the corresponding
             issuing entity and the POS authorisation. Merchant acquirers either provide
             acquiring processing in house, or outsource it to third party processors;
         <U+F0B7>   issuing processing: the issuer-oriented side of technically processing a payment
             transaction. It includes the financial and technical request for payment
             authorisation from the issuing entity, maintenance and management of local and
             international blocking lists, verification of card limits, management of card
             accounts, generation of cardholder statements and invoicing.
                                                     4

(15) In addition, Equens is also active in clearing & settlement, and Worldline is a leading
      terminal manufacturer and provider, selling or renting and providing maintenance
      services to customers (i.e. merchants/retailers). It also provides acquiring processing
      services for iDEAL transactions, a card-less payment method existing in the Netherlands
      and provided by online merchants to their customers that allows direct access to the
      customers’ bank accounts for the payment of goods or services sold by these merchants.
(16) Finally, Worldline is also active as a provider of application software for the banking
      sector.
IV.2.    Product markets
(17) In previous Commission decisions10, the relevant product markets were in essence
      defined along the lines of the key functions/services involved in a payment card
      transaction described above in recital (14). In particular, the Commission distinguished
      three main card related activities: (i) the issuing of payment cards to individuals and
      companies, (ii) payment card processing and (iii) the acquiring of merchants for card
      payment acceptance (merchant acquiring).
(18) In view of the overlaps of the Parties' activities resulting from the Transaction, the
      potential markets for (1) merchant acquiring, (2) card processing (acquiring processing &
      issuing processing), (3) credit (SCT) transfer, e-commerce payments and iDEAL
      processing, (4) the provision of POS terminals and related services, and (5) the market for
      the provision of software for German network service providers ("NSPs"), will be
      discussed below.
IV.2.1. Merchant acquiring
                    IV.2.1.1.    Previous Commission decisions
(19) In previous decisions,11 the Commission considered that the merchant acquiring market
      could be further subdivided along a number of axes: (a) types of payment card schemes
      (international/domestic), (b) payment card brands (e.g. Visa, MasterCard), (c) the type of
      payment card (debit/credit); and (d) depending on whether services are required for
      payments made through physical POS terminals or via web-enabled interfaces
      (eCommerce). In all previous cases, the Commission left the precise scope of the product
      market definition open
                    IV.2.1.2.    Notifying Party's view
(20) The Notifying Party considers the most relevant market to be the overall merchant
      acquiring market notably because the main concern of the merchant is to be able to accept
      as many types of cards as possible irrespective of its type. However, the Notifying Party
      also submits that the segmentations previously considered by the Commission could be
      relevant due to certain differences among acquiring activities for certain types of cards.
10      See for example M.7241 - Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding; M.7078 - Santander
        Consumer Finance/ El Corte Ingles/ Financiera El Corte Ingles, M.5241 - American Express/Fortis/Alpha
        Card.
11      See for example M.7241 - Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding, Case M.7711 -
        Advent International/Bain Capital/ICBPI, M.6956 - Telefonica/Caixabank/Banco Santander, M.5241 -
        American Express/Fortis/Alpha Card.
                                                          5

                        a) Regarding the potential segmentation of the relevant market by
                            distinguishing between international and domestic schemes, the
                            Notifying Party notes the following differences: clearing and settlement
                            go through different channels, the card technology (may) differ, product
                            and business rules are different (defined on supra-national basis for
                            international schemes), and prices also vary. Finally, the Notifying
                            Party also submits that domestic schemes have been phased out in a
                            number of EU Member States (including the Netherlands and
                            Luxembourg), but remain important in others (including notably
                            Belgium and Germany).
                        b) As for a distinction by card brand, the Notifying Party argues that from
                            the demand side, there is no need to divide the market for merchant
                            acquiring in this manner, as merchants usually aim for business reasons
                            at accepting all brands, or at least the well-established brands, of
                            payment cards. From a supply side, it submits that most merchant
                            acquirers are able to acquire different brands, and hence is not certain
                            whether such segmentation is relevant.
                        c) Regarding the potential segmentation of the relevant                    market by
                            distinguishing between acquiring of credit and debit                  card based
                            transactions, the Notifying Party submits that differences            in terms of
                            price, interchange fees or commercial conditions may                   justify the
                            definition of separate markets.
                        d) Regarding the potential segmentation of the relevant market by
                            distinguishing between POS-based and web-enabled acquiring services,
                            the Notifying Party notes that differences remain concerning technical
                            infrastructure, commercial strategy, risk and fraud management
                            requirements. It also points to the existence of players only active on
                            the acquiring of web-enabled transactions. In addition, some customers
                            have separate contracts for each type of services with different terms
                            and conditions and even different services providers.
                    IV.2.1.3.     Commission's assessment
(21) In the present case, the Parties' merchant acquiring activities overlap with regard to
     certain card brands, international schemes, debit and credit cards, as well as both POS
     terminals and web-enabled interfaces. The Commission's market investigation aimed at
     establishing whether the definition of separate markets for these previously contemplated
     segments would be appropriate.
(22) Generally speaking, the results of the market investigation clearly indicate that most
     merchant acquirers do not offer the acquiring of the same types of cards, even if most
     offer the most common brands such as Visa for example.12 As the time and investment
     needed to add another type of card to an acquirer's portfolio is a relevant consideration for
     all contemplated market segmentations13, the following considerations regarding supply-
12     See replies to Questions 23, 24 and 31 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
13     If a company were only active in international schemes, it would have to add a domestic card scheme to
       its portfolio just as much as a credit card specialist would have to add a debit card to its portfolio to
       become active in this segment.
                                                           6

     side substitutability14 should be made upfront, as they apply to all plausible product
     markets assessed in this section..
(23) The results of the market investigation indicate that it would take a considerable amount
     of time and investment15 for merchant acquirers to start offering acquiring of a new card
     (brand or type). One competitor describes the necessary steps as follows: "In order to add
     a scheme […] where X is not providing acquiring services yet, X has to: Acquire an
     acquiring license of this scheme, set-up the payment processing environment (acquiring
     processing host, connected to the scheme), pass through the certification process, and
     organize the operational flow: boarding, activation, billing, pay-out."16 This would
     suggest that generally speaking, there is very limited supply-side substitutability across all
     plausible market segments.17
(24) As for demand-side substitutability18 across acceptance of different cards by merchants, it
     should be borne in mind that for a merchant, the possibility to accept one type of card has
     little relevance if a customer wants to pay with a different type of card. Therefore, the
     Notifying Party's claim that most merchants are interested in having the possibility to
     accept a relatively wide range of payment cards is probably accurate. This indicates, at a
     general level, that the demand side substitutability between different types of cards and
     ultimately between merchant acquiring services for different types of cards (debit/credit,
     domestic card scheme/international card scheme, Visa/American express etc.) is rather
     limited.
(25) In addition, the market investigation revealed certain differences across cards that
     specifically support the market segmentations which the Commission considered in
     previous cases.
                                a) International vs domestic card schemes
(26) The results of the market investigation confirm the Notifying Party's submission that
     prices for acquiring services can vary significantly between domestic (in as far as they
     exist) and international schemes.19 In addition, a number of customers point to other
     differences as regards for example the amount of time that it takes for a payment to arrive
     at the merchant's account.20
14     See Commission notice on the definition of relevant market for the purposes of Community competition
       law ("Commission Notice on market definition"), OJ C 372, 9.12.1997, p. 5–13, and in particular
       paragraphs 20 et seq.
15     Between several months and years and between EUR several hundred thousand and millions.
16     See replies to Question 11 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
17     See replies to Question 11 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
18     See Commission Notice on market definition and in particular paragraphs 15 et seq.
19     See replies to Question 6 of Questionnaire Q1 to customers, and Question 12 of Questionnaire Q4 to
       competitors.
20     See replies to Question 6 of Questionnaire Q1 to customers.
                                                          7

                                b) Debit vs. credit card
(27) The results of the market investigation indicate that there are significant differences in
     pricing across debit and credit schemes.21 Customers also mentioned that other modalities
     such as charge back and pay out delays vary between debit and credit cards.22
                                c) Segmentation by card brand
(28) Similarly as for the above plausible market segmentations, respondents to the market
     investigations (both customers and competitors) confirm that each card scheme has its
     own and different pricing, and pay-out delay might also vary.23
                                d) POS vs web-enabled
(29) Finally, a clearly majority of customers and an overwhelming majority of competitors
     have identified various differences between acquiring services for POS terminals and
     web-enabled interfaces.24
Conclusion
(30) The above supports that the existence of separate markets for the segments considered in
     previous Commission decisions remains plausible. This means types that the
     segmentation of the market by the following axes – (a) payment card schemes
     (international/domestic), (b) payment card brands (e.g. Visa, MasterCard), (c) the type of
     payment card (debit/credit); and (d) depending on whether services are required for
     payments made through physical POS terminals or via web-enabled interfaces
     (eCommerce) – remains pertinent.
(31) The Commission also considers at this stage that national specificities, which will be
     discussed in greater detail below in the section the relevant geographic market (see
     section IV.3.1), might have a bearing on the precise product market definition. For
     instance, in Luxembourg and the Netherlands, there are no domestic schemes anymore,
     which make a distinction between those types of scheme futile. On the other hand,
     Belgium's domestic debit scheme, Bancontact Mr Cash ("BCMC"), remains important in
     this Member State. In view of the fact that all BCMC cards are co-branded with the
     Maestro international debit scheme, and that retailers can choose which brand they prefer
     that there is consequently certainly a relatively high degree of demand-side
     substitutability between the two, the distinction between international schemes and the
     domestic schemes appears to be of little or at least less relevance than in other EU
     Member States with strong domestic cards schemes. Finally, also in Germany the
     domestic debit scheme plays an important role – and a specific set-up (see below in
21     See replies to Question 8 of Questionnaire Q1 to customers, Question 6.2 of Questionnaire Q2 to
       customers and Question 12.2 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
22     See replies to Question 6.2 of Questionnaire Q1 to customers.
23     See replies to Question 6.3 of Questionnaire Q1 to customers, Question 6.3 of Questionnaire Q2 to
       customers and Question 12.3 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
24     See replies to Question 6.3 of Questionnaire Q1 to customers, Question 6.3 of Questionnaire Q2 to
       customers and Question 12.3 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
                                                           8

      section IV.2.5), particularly the distinction domestic vs international schemes seems to be
      more pertinent there than in other Member States.
(32) In any event, the definition of the relevant product market can be left open for the
      purposes of the present decision as the Transaction, depending on the geographic markets,
      either raises or does not raise serious doubts under all plausible product market definition
      considered in this section.
IV.2.2. Card processing
                   IV.2.2.1.     Previous Commission decisions
(33) The Commission has previously defined a distinct market for payment card processing,
      and within that market, has distinguished between acquiring processing and issuing
      processing, but ultimately left that segmentation open25. The Commission also inter alia
      considered that the market for acquiring processing services could be further segmented
      between acquiring processing for POS transactions and for web-enabled transactions.26
      Conversely, the Commission has never considered any possible further segmentation of
      the market for issuing processing.
                   IV.2.2.2.     Notifying Party's view
      The Notifying Party agrees with the Commission's previous decisions. The Notifying
      Party also submits that acquiring processing and issuing processing comprise actions
      which can be different and cannot be considered as substitutable for each other within the
      meaning of the EUMR.
(34) According to the Notifying Party, the market for issuing processing should not be further
      segmented. The Notifying Party submits that the technical requirements and complexity
      which may justify a segmentation of the market on the acquiring processing side, are less
      relevant on the issuing processing side. The Notifying Party submits that, as a general
      matter, on the acquiring processing side, it is necessary to be able to adapt to the variety
      of cards that the merchant can accept, and to the types of transactions (POS/web-enabled),
      whereas those factors are less prominent for the issuing processor. For example, for the
      issuing processor the processing will be the same regardless of where the transaction is
      originated (POS/Web-Enabled).
                   IV.2.2.3.     Commission's assessment
(35) There is no information at the Commission's disposal, including from its market
      investigation which would suggest it were appropriate to deviate from its previous
      decisional practice according to which, in the card processing space, a general distinction
      should be drawn between acquiring processing and issuing processing services and,
      within acquiring processing services, a distinction between acquiring processing for POS
      transactions and for web-enabled transactions is likely to exist. Furthermore, the market
25      See for example M.7241- Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding; M.7078 - Santander
        Consumer Finance/El Corte Ingles/Financiera El Corte Ingles; M.5241 - American Express/Fortis/Alpha
        Card.
26      M.7241- Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding.
                                                          9

      investigation did not provide any evidence that any further segmentation of a possible
      market for issuing processing should be considered.27
(36) Under these plausible market definition, the Parties activities give rise to one potentially
      affected market in issuing processing, i.e. issuing processing in Germany, and possibly
      with respect to acquiring processing in the Netherlands, should the processing of iDEAL,
      as described below in section IV.2.3, fall in this product market.
(37) In any event, the product market definitions can be left open as under these plausible
      market definitions the Transaction does not give rise to serious doubts.
IV.2.3. Credit and iDEAL processing
                    IV.2.3.1.    Introduction
(38) Potential overlaps between the Parties' activities also arise with respect to Worldline's
      supply of acquiring processing services for iDEAL transactions, and Equens' processing
      activities, including of credit transfers and (card based) electronic transactions.
(39) iDEAL is a payment method provided by online merchants to their customers that allows
      direct access to the customers’ bank accounts for the payment of goods sold or services
      rendered by these merchants. iDEAL does not require the use of a credit- or debit card.
(40) From an end user perspective, the look and experience of iDEAL varies per bank and is
      identical to the online services delivered to clients of the respective bank. Therefore,
      iDEAL is perceived by consumers as part of their online bank environment.
(41) Ten banks active in the Netherlands (including the major ones) have connected their
      online banking environments to iDEAL. In the Netherlands, iDEAL is offered to online
      merchants by approximately fifty Payment Service Providers ("PSPs") as a part of the
      payment methods available on the Dutch e-commerce market, which also include credit
      transfers initiated by the consumer, SOFORT (a similar tool as iDEAL but offered by
      fewer Dutch banks), credit card transactions, PayPal and many others.
(42) The key service provided by the iDEAL processor to its customers, i.e. the banks that
      participate in iDEAL, is to provide the "switch", which establishes the connectivity and
      transactions routing/communication between the participating banks, and some reporting
      activities.
                    IV.2.3.2.    Previous Commission decisions
(43) As described above in section IV.2.2, the Commission has previously considered that the
      market for acquiring processing services could be further segmented between acquiring
      processing for POS transactions and for web-enabled transactions.28
(44) The Commission has thus far never assessed whether iDEAL processing forms part of the
      same market as (card based) acquiring processing. It also has never considered other
      plausible market to which iDEAL could belong, i.e. markets for SEPA credit transfer
      processing, or e-commerce payments.
27      See for example conference call with a customer, dated 17 February 2016.
28      M.7241- Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding.
                                                          10

                  IV.2.3.3.      Notifying Party's view
(45) The Notifying Party firstly submits that iDEAL processing could form part of one of the
     following product markets: first, an overall market for processing of credit transfers;
     second, an overall market for the acquiring processing of all forms of e-commerce or,
     third, a market for the acquiring processing of all forms of card-less e-commerce.
(46) Regarding the first proposed market definition, the Notifying Party submits that since the
     introduction of the Single Euro Payments Area ("SEPA"), credit transfers in EUR across
     the Member States of the EU must be made using the SEPA Credit Transfer ("SCT")
     scheme. It explains that the regulation of SCT has brought about also a harmonisation of
     the technical processing requirements, and that SCT processing in the EU is done by a
     wide variety of processors that all support the same protocols. The Notifying Party
     submits that for both iDEAL and SCT processing, processors play the role of a hub
     redirecting the credit transfers to banks that further process them in their back offices.
(47) Secondly, the Notifying Party submits that iDEAL processing could potentially also form
     part of a market for acquiring processing of all forms of e-commerce payments. In its
     view, the particularities of e-commerce, such as the particularly high security
     requirements that protect against fraud, would speak in favour of such a market definition.
(48) Thirdly, the Notifying party submits that within a potential market for acquiring
     processing of e-commerce payments a distinction could be made between card-based and
     card-less e-commerce payments processing.
(49) The Notifying Party also submits that it would not be appropriate to consider iDEAL
     processing as belonging to the market for acquiring processing of card payments, given
     that iDEAL initiates a non-card payment.
(50) Finally, the Notifying Party submits that defining a separate market for processing of
     iDEAL payments would artificially distinguish iDEAL from substitutable competitive e-
     commerce payment products such as SOFORT.
                  IV.2.3.4.      Commission's assessment
(51) At the outset, the Commission notes that any potential product market definition which
     would be broader than merely encompassing the processing of iDEAL transaction would
     be so for reasons of supply-side substitutability, as from a demand-side perspective, the
     customers (Dutch banks) could not replace the processing of their iDEAL transactions
     with that of other transactions.
(52) In terms of supply-side substitutability, the result of the market investigation were not
     conclusive on whether iDEAL acquiring processing should be considered as part of the
     same market as the acquiring processing of card transactions. Moreover, the market
     investigation indicated that, regardless what kind of processing a company not performing
     iDEAL processing does today, it would take approximately a year before it could process
     iDEAL transactions.29
(53) In addition, the results of market investigation indicate that it would most likely be
     incorrect to consider the processing of iDEAL transactions to form part of a market
     comprising (card based) acquiring processing. For example, customers have described it
29     See Question 80.1 and 80. 2 of Questionnaire, Q4 to competitors.
                                                         11

      as "not card based, […] contrary to (web-enabled) card scheme transactions. iDEAL is a
      web-based eCom[merce] product which relies on Bank log-in credentials, allowing a
      SCT debit and credit between the accounts of the issuer and the acquiring".30
(54) In any event, the product market definition – i.e. whether iDEAL processing is a separate
      product market, or belongs to a broader market comprising either all SCT credit
      transactions, e-commerce transactions (or the card-less segment thereof), or even
      acquiring processing of card-based transactions (or the web-enabled segment thereof) –
      can be left open as under none of these plausible market definition the Transaction gives
      rise to serious doubts.
IV.2.4. Provision of POS terminals and related services
                     IV.2.4.1.     Introduction
(55) By way of introduction, a point-of-sale ("POS") terminal is the electronic device used to
      process card payments at the merchant's location. It is thus a necessary element for
      physical card based transactions. POS terminals are either sold or rented to merchants
      jointly with the merchant acquiring services or separately on a standalone basis. The
      provision of terminals typically also includes services contracts for related services
      (maintenance and updates).
(56) POS terminals usually run on certain acceptance protocol specifications, which as of
      today, still vary from country to country. C-TAP (Common Terminal Acquirer Protocol)
      in the Benelux is an open protocol allowing all local and international acquiring
      processors active in the Benelux to process all transactions. Many other protocols, also
      made available by certification bodies, are established on a national basis.
(57) Worldline is an important POS terminals manufacturer and provider of terminal related
      services in Belgium (in 2015, it controlled [60-80]% of the terminals installed base in this
      country)31 as well as in other EEA countries interested by the Transaction (in particular
      the Netherlands where Worldline is the second largest player after CCV).
(58) Equens, on the contrary, does not manufacture or sell POS terminals. It either partners
      with third Party terminal suppliers […] to have joint commercial offers or only offers
      acquiring services.
                     IV.2.4.2.     Previous Commission decisions
(59) The Commission has not previously considered a distinct market for the provision of POS
      terminals (and related services).
                     IV.2.4.3.     Notifying Party's view
(60) In the Notifying Party's view, it is not appropriate to consider the provision of POS
      terminals and related services as a separate product market.32
30      See replies of customers to questions of the Commission, received on 9 and 10 March.
31      Form CO, Figure 17.
32      Form CO, para. 193 and 309..
                                                          12

(61) In particular, the Notifying Party argues that POS terminals are a mere input to merchant
     acquiring services and that, as a consequence, this activity should be considered as
     ancillary to merchant acquiring, but not as part of a separate product market.
                    IV.2.4.4.     Commission's assessment
(62) Contrary to the Notifying's Party's claims, the market investigation suggested that a
     separate market for the provision of POS terminals may exist.
(63) A large number of Belgian customers responded that they typically procure POS
     terminals (and related services) from a provider which is not their merchant acquirer.33
(64) The responses of competitors in this regard were rather mixed.34 Some competitors stated
     that, in Belgium, they usually provide (either sell their own or rent) the POS terminal
     together with the merchant acquiring services, while others responded that, when
     providing their acquiring services, they do not supply their own terminals.
(65) A large POS terminal provider in Belgium and the Netherlands, stated that “merchants
     can either rent or buy the terminals, often together with an acquiring contract.”35 The
     same market participant however indicated that they are able to also provide acquiring on
     competitors' terminals “provided that these work on the domestic CTAP protocol.” 36
(66) The market investigation additionally suggested that there may be a difference in the
     merchants' purchasing strategy, depending on their size.37 While large retailers appear to
     be in a position to and often do buy the POS terminal separately from the merchant
     acquiring services, SMEs largely opt for packaged solutions, which include both the
     acquiring and the POS terminal.
(67) This was revealed, inter alia, by a competitor who, during the market investigation, stated
     that "there is a difference between SMEs who typically like to have an all in one offering
     and larger merchants who are more willing to buy separately."38
(68) In view of the above, notably the difference in the supplier base for POS terminals and
     merchant acquirers, and the presence of customers that buy terminals and merchant
     acquiring services separately, the Commission considers that a separate product market
     for POS terminals may exist.
(69) In any event, the definition of a potential separate market for POS terminals can be can be
     left open as the commitment removing the serious doubts regarding merchant acquiring in
     Belgium, as discussed below, also remove doubts that could arise regarding a potential
     market for POS terminals in Belgium. In other Member States serious doubts do not arise
     irrespective of whether a separate market is defined.
33     See replies to Question 31 of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers.
34     See replies to Question 6 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
35     See minutes of conference call with a competitor, dated 22 February 2016.
36     See reply to Question 7 of Questionnaire Q 4 to competitors.
37     See replies to Question 46 of Questionnaire Q 4 to Competitors.
38     See minutes of conference call with a competitor, dated 22 February 2016.
                                                          13

IV.2.5. Provision of software for the activities of German NSPs
                   IV.2.5.1.    Introduction
(70) As a result of the Transaction, a vertical link arises due to the fact that Paysquare is a
      customer of a software (WLP/Poseidon, hereinafter: "Poseidon") it buys from Worldline
      in order to carry out its activities as a Network Service Provider ("NSP") in Germany.
(71) By means of background, Germany's card payment systems are somewhat different to
      those described in the introduction above (as from recital (11)), in particular due to the
      specificities of the prevalent domestic Girocard scheme, through which a majority of card
      transaction are made.
(72) In the German card payment systems, there is an additional important actor in the value
      chain, namely the NSP (Network Service Provider). NSPs provide payment card
      acceptance to the merchant, including terminal distribution, terminal management, and
      routing of card transactions towards the issuer banks. There are currently 19 NSPs in
      Germany.
(73) The function of NSPs differs somewhat for the domestic German Girocard scheme and
      international schemes. As illustrated below, NSPs establish direct connectivity to the
      issuers for Girocard transactions, whereas for international schemes, i.e mostly credit
      cards, they establish connectivity with the acquirers, which can be the same companies as
      the NSPs (but there are also NSPs which do not acquire international cards, and "pure"
      acquirers which are not active as NSPs).
                                                     14

Figure 3: Role of NSPs (Netzbetreiber, in German) in card payment systems in Germany
Source: Notifying Party
(74) The above illustration also shows that in Germany, transactions made at a POS terminal
      have to pass through an NSP.
(75) In order for this communication to function, the terminal and the NSP's host computer
      have to use the same protocol. In Germany, the overwhelming majority of terminals
      (approx. [90-100] % according to the Notifying Party) run on the ZVT-protocol, which is
      owned by Worldline, and is either licensed to NSPs either jointly with the so called
      Poseidon software, or separately.
(76) Poseidon is an application software developed specifically for NSP activities. It
      comprises several modules and is described by the Notifying Party as a "toolbox" for
      several NSP functionalities including routing, clearing, authorization, communication
      protocol ZVT, routing of credit card transactions and some terminal management
      functions.
(77) Out of Germany's 19 NSPs, 18 work with the ZVT protocol, and [10-20] with Poseidon.
      [1-5] ZVT users have developed their own proprietary software. This is illustrated by the
      graph below.
Figure 4: Role of Poseidon and ZVT for German NSPs
[…]
Source: Notifying Party
                                                        15

                    IV.2.5.2.       Previous Commission decisions
(78) In previous decisions, the Commission distinguished IT software from IT services. 39 The
     Commission also considered that software supply could be segmented on the basis of a
     number of criteria, such as functionality and end-use, further segmented in some case by
     application or level of sophistication, but always leaving the exact delineation of the
     market open.40
(79) The Commission has thus far never dealt with software for NSP activities in Germany, or
     Poseidon specifically, and has never analysed to which product market Poseidon could
     belong.
                    IV.2.5.3.       Notifying Party's view
(80) The Notifying Party submits that Poseidon in Germany can be classified in the application
     software and office software category and belongs more specifically to the banking and
     financial business software sub-category.
(81) The Notifying Party argues that it would not be appropriate to define a product market
     only consisting of one Product – Poseidon, which is only licensed to [10-20] customers in
     one Member State.
(82) In support of its argument, the Notifying Party considers that there are a number of
     competitors that could supply equivalent software, and that the development therefore
     would be simple and not too costly for an undertaking specialised in developing software
     for the banking and financial industry. In its view, the fact that [1-5] NSPs have chosen to
     develop their own software solution in-house supports this argument, and militates in
     favour of a wider product market.
(83) The Notifying Party also submits that no competitor has yet developed software which is
     individualised to the NSPs in Germany. […].
                    IV.2.5.4.       Commission's assessment
(84) The Commission notes at the outset that the market investigation supported to the relevant
     extent the description, in particular as to the usage, of Poseidon as submitted by the
     Notifying Party, and as summarised in the introductory part of this section IV.2.5.1.41
(85) The Commission also notes that the fact that either the number of relevant customers or
     the geographic area within which they are located are limited, is as such no obstacle to
     defining a relevant market for the purposes of merger control.
(86) According to the Commission Notice on market definition, specifically paragraphs 13 to
     23, the relevant test is to determine alternative sources of supply based on demand-side
     and supply-side considerations.
(87) In the case at hand, the relevant group are NSPs, and particularly those [10-20] that have
     not developed an in-house solution and instead rely on Poseidon.
39     See for example M.7458 - IBM/INF Business of Deutsche Lufthansa; M.6166 - Deutsche Börse/NYSE
       Euronext.
40     See for example M.6166 - Deutsche Borse/NYSE Euronext.
41     See in particular replies to Questions 1-6 of Questionnaire Q6 to German Network Service Providers.
                                                            16

(88) In terms of demand-side substitution, the results of the market investigation indicate
     clearly that these customers have no possibility to switch to a different product. All those
     NSPs that have not developed their own solution would continue to licence Poseidon
     from Worldline if price were to increase by 5-10%.42 Similarly, all respondents to the
     market investigation could only identify Poseidon or their respective in-house product as
     a means to perform their NSP activities. Those that rely on Poseidon today confirmed
     they could not use another product that a competitor has developed for its in-house needs,
     and explain that the only alternative to Poseidon would be to engage in the development
     of an in-house solution themselves.43
(89) Regarding supply-side substitutability, the results of the market investigation indicate that
     it would take a significant amount of time and resources for a NSP to develop its own
     solution, or for another software provider to develop an alternative. Accordingly, none of
     the respondents to the market investigation considers that another company would
     develop an alternative if prices rose by 5-10%.44
(90) In terms of cost for the development of an alternative, the estimations obtained are mostly
     qualitative – but imply a significant cost, and given the small amount of potential
     customers, almost certainly not commercially viable: One customer for example explains
     that "There is a lot of legacy and functionalities built in over more than 20 years, so the
     investment would be huge. It is also a saturated market where we can expect
     consolidations of NSP’s, so this NSP market is shrinking." Another states that. "The
     investment for a third party software provider would be huge and it would be open how
     many German Network Service Providers would migrate to a total new software
     platform." A third customer explains that "…due to the limited market capacity the
     development of a second solution will not be commercially justifiable."45
(91) Finally, an overwhelming majority of respondents to the market investigations estimate
     that it would take 2 years or more (up to 5 years) to develop an alternative.46
(92) For the above reasons, the Commission considers it as appropriate to define a market
     solely comprising software for the activities of German NSPs, possibly only for those that
     rely on terminals using the ZVT protocol. The latter segmentation can be left open
     however, given that under both scenarios serious doubts arise as a result of the
     Transactions.
42     See replies to Question 8 of Questionnaire Q6 to German Network Service Providers.
43     See replies to Question 7 (and to sub-questions) of Questionnaire Q6 to German Network Service
       Providers.
44     See replies to Question 9 of Questionnaire Q6 to German Network Service Providers.
45     See replies to Question 9.1 of Questionnaire Q6 to German Network Service Providers.
46     See replies to Question 10 of Questionnaire Q6 to German Network Service Providers.
                                                          17

IV.3.    Geographic market
IV.3.1. Merchant acquiring
                     IV.3.1.1.     Previous Commission decisions
(93) The Commission has previously considered the market for merchant acquiring as being
      likely national in scope or, at most EEA-wide, irrespective of the type of card, the card
      scheme and the card brand.47
(94) In a most recent decision48, the Commission considered that the market for merchant
      acquiring services for all plausible market segmentations, except web-enabled
      transactions, is most likely national in scope, whereas the market for merchant acquiring
      services for payments made through web-enabled interfaces (eCommerce) would likely
      be EEA-wide.
                     IV.3.1.2.     Notifying Party's view
(95) The Notifying Party submits in essence that the Commission's precedents remain relevant
      for now.
(96) As regards the market for merchant acquiring services for POS payments it considers it
      most likely national in scope, as it is important to have a local presence either through a
      legal entity or through a sales force. By means of example, it explains that it was not
      sufficient for Paysquare to have sales personnel speak the local languages in Belgium but
      it had to adapt to the Belgian culture and mentality to effectively enter the market.
      Moreover, the Notifying Party sees a local presence as a key factor to gain market share
      in the POS segment as it allows the acquirers to carry out doorstep selling i.e. sending
      sales force into the shops in order to convince merchants that the merchant acquiring
      service they offer is better/cheaper.
(97) On the other hand, the market for merchant acquiring services for payments through web-
      enabled interfaces is at least EEA-wide, in the Notifying Party's view, given that a local
      presence is not necessary.
(98) As for other plausible segmentations, the Notifying Party submits that markets for
      domestic schemes and brands are necessarily national in scope, whereas plausibly
      international schemes and brands could be wider.
                     IV.3.1.3.     Commission's assessment
(99) As a preliminary remark, the Commission notes that there is indisputably a trend towards
      harmonisation across Member States in the payment systems space, and increasingly, the
      formerly often completely closed off national merchant acquiring markets are gradually
      opening up to competition.49
47      M.4316 - Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC; /M.5241 - American Express/Fortis/Alpha Card; M.6956 -
        Telefonica/Caixabank/Banco Santander; M.7241 - Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets
        Holding.
48      M.7711 - Advent International / Bain Capital /ICBPI.
49      See also the submissions of a competitor (Nets), of 10 and 25 March 2016, illustrating this development.
                                                            18

(100) Nonetheless, and contrary to credit and debit transfers, there are still numerous national
      specificities that appear to prevent the creation of a homogenous EEA wide merchant
      acquiring market, as illustrated for example by the following statement of Yves Mersch,
      Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank: "Migration to the Single
      Euro Payments Area (SEPA) for credit transfers and direct debits was a major milestone
      in European retail payments integration. SEPA for cards is the next logical step in that
      process. To this day, consumers and merchants, but also banks and other payment service
      providers, still encounter obstacles or experience geographical differences when making
      and accepting card payments. We are not yet there with the SEPA for cards, i.e. a
      harmonised, competitive and innovative European card payments area".50
(101) The results of the market investigation largely confirm the Notifying Party's submission
      that in order to compete successfully in POS-based merchant acquiring, a local presence
      is necessary. An overwhelming majority of competitors consider that this is the case,51
      due to Member State specific demand characteristics, such as customers' wish to have
      services provided in their local language, in order to communicate to merchants
      personally, and because the knowledge of the local market is key to compete successfully.
(102) Moreover, a majority of competitors also pointed to significant differences across EEA
      countries as regards the provision of merchant acquiring services. For example, they
      mentioned that prices can vary significantly, even within the same payment scheme, that
      the players and infrastructure in the payment systems industry can be different (for
      example the role of banks), and that the terminal standards or terminal protocol are
      different (for example, in the Benelux countries, the C-TAP protocol is used in most
      terminals, whereas most German terminals run on the ZVT protocol).52
(103) In addition, there are number of countries, including notably Germany and Belgium, in
      which domestic schemes (Girocard in Germany and BCMC in Belgium) still play a very
      important role. Access to a new payment scheme costs significant time and money, and
      therefore a domestic scheme can be a hurdle to cross-border competition, at least in this
      segment.
(104) None of the above is to suggest that no cross-border competition takes place. In fact,
      many respondents to the market investigations indicated that they would be ready to
      accept offers from outside their home country,53 and a number of competitors also
      expressed the view that competition in merchant acquiring, or certain market segments
      thereof, takes place a wider than national level, either at the level of the a cluster of
      countries such as the Benelux or even at EEA-level.54
(105) The reasons for this may be that the profile of different merchants varies considerably.
      […].55 […].
50      Speech by Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the Banque de France
        Conference on card payments in Europe – latest trends and challenges, Paris, 18 January 2016
51      See replies to Question 19 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
52      See replies to Question 20 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
53      See replies to Questions 9 and 10 of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers, and Questions 9 and 10 of
        Questionnaire Q2 to Dutch customers.
54      See replies to Question 21 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
55      […].
                                                           19

(106) However, the huge discrepancies in market shares of the Parties and their competitors, to
      the extent that they are present, even across countries in a seemingly relatively
      homogenous region such as the Benelux, illustrate that currently the pattern of purchases
      of merchant acquiring services still follows national boundaries.
(107) In view of the above, the Commission considers that for the time being, in spite of the
      trend towards harmonisation across Member States in the payment systems space, the
      factors speaking in favour of a national market, for all POS-based merchant acquiring
      activities, still outweigh those that would support a wider geographic scope of the
      relevant market.
(108) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers merchant acquiring markets,
      probably with the exception of the web-enabled market segment, remain, for the time
      being, national, as least in those Member States at the heart of the present case, that is
      Belgium and Germany. For Luxembourg and the Netherlands, this can be left open as no
      serious doubts arise relating to the Parties' activities in merchant acquiring in those
      markets, or upstream, downstream or related markets thereto.
IV.3.2. Issuing processing
                    IV.3.2.1.   Previous Commission decisions
(109) The Commission has previously considered that card processing markets including
      issuing processing, are probably national or potentially EEA wide in scope, but ultimately
      left the market definition open.56
                    IV.3.2.2.   Notifying Party's view
(110) The Notifying Party considers that the markets for transaction processing remain national
      in scope, as most issuing processing and acquiring processing services for national
      customers are still provided by national or locally present suppliers.
(111) According to the Notifying Party, however, with the EU regulatory changes and SEPA
      initiatives, there is an increasing amount of cross-border processing of credit and debit
      cards and a consequent trend towards the “Europeanization” of these markets in the SEPA
      area.
                    IV.3.2.3.   Commission's assessment
(112) There are no elements at the Commission's disposal, including from its market
      investigation, which would suggest that it would be appropriate to deviate from its
      previous decisional practice and to disagree with the Notifying Party's claims.
(113) The Commission shares the view of the Notifying Party that these markets are, at present,
      still characterised by strong national elements, although, as noted in recital (31) above,
      the Commission recognizes the existence of an undisputable trend towards harmonisation
      across Member States in the payment systems space.
(114) In any event, the precise geographic scope of the market can be left open as the
      Transaction does not give rise to serious doubts as its compatibility with the common
      market regardless of whether it is defined at national or EEA wide level.
56      M.5968 – Advent/Bain Capital/RBS Worldpay.
                                                     20

IV.3.3. Geographic scope of the potential markets to which iDEAL processing belongs
                   IV.3.3.1.        Previous Commission decisions
(115) Regarding the plausible product markets contemplated above – i.e. a separate iDEAL
      processing market, or a broader market comprising either all SCT credit transactions, e-
      commerce transactions (or the card-less segment thereof), or even acquiring processing of
      card-based transactions – the Commission has so far only assessed the geographic
      dimension of acquiring processing.
(116) In previous decisions on this point, the Commission has left open whether these markets
      are national or EEA wide57, though it recently contemplated an EEA-wide dimension of
      the web-enabled segment of acquiring processing.58
                   IV.3.3.2.        Notifying Party's view
(117) The Notifying Party submits that acquiring processing markets are still national in scope,
      even if they are gradually opening up.
(118) According to the Notifying Party, a potential market for SCT processing would be EU (or
      EEA) wide in scope, given the harmonisation of the relevant standards and protocols, and
      the homogenous supplier base.
(119) Other plausible product market to which iDEAL processing belongs would, in the
      Notifying Party's view, be most likely national in scope.
                   IV.3.3.3.        Commission's assessment
(120) The results of the market investigation strongly suggest that (potential) iDEAL processors
      do not necessary have to have a presence in the Netherlands to perform this activity59.
      This indicates that the geographic scope of plausible product markets to which iDEAL
      processing belongs could indeed be EEA-wide, given in particular also the fact that the
      investment necessary to become a supplier of such services does not seem to vary
      according to where a company is based or active.
(121) The market investigation also supported the Notifying Party's submission that formerly
      national processing markets are gradually opening up, notably also due to the creation of
      SEPA. For example, one iDEAL customer referred to the future possibility of turning to
      non-Netherlands based suppliers instead or in addition to Worldline.60
(122) On the other hand, iDEAL remains for now a payment system that is only accessible to
      customers of Dutch banks, and those banks are the only customers for (potential) iDEAL
      processors. Contrary to for example the processing of SCT transactions, there are
      evidently no EEA-wide standards with which all banks would have to comply.
(123) Were the Commission to define a product market comprising only the processing of
      iDEAL transactions, then it would appear to be more logical to limit this market to the
57      M.5968 – Advent/Bain Capital/RBS Worldpay.
58      M.7241- Advent International/Bain Capital Investors/Nets Holding.
59      See Question 80.1 and 80.2 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
60      See minutes of a call with a customer, 13 January 2016.
                                                           21

      Netherlands, as this is where all the processing customers and the vast majority of end-
      users are located.
(124) In any event, the precise geographic scope of the various potential markets to which
      iDEAL processing belongs can be left open, as no serious doubts arise regardless of
      whether they are defined at national, Eurozone, EU or EEA wide level.
IV.3.4. Provision of POS terminals (and related services)
                     IV.3.4.1.     Previous Commission decisions
(125) The Commission has so far never assessed whether a separate market for the provision of
      POS terminals should be considered, and hence has not assessed the geographic scope of
      such a market.
                     IV.3.4.2.     Notifying Party's view
(126) As described above in recital (60), the Notifying Party does not consider it appropriate to
      define a separate market for the provision of POS terminals (and related services), but
      considers that POS terminals should be viewed as ancillary to merchant acquiring
      services and should, as a consequence, be considered as a part of the merchant acquiring
      market.
(127) The Notifying Party submits that, should a potential separate market for the provision of
      POS terminals be considered as relevant, such market would remain, at present, rather
      national in scope.61
                     IV.3.4.3.     Commission's assessment
(128) Based on the market investigation, there are strong indications that the appropriate
      geographic scope of a possible separate market for the provision of POS terminals should
      be national, or at the very least comprised of cluster of countries.
(129) For example, the majority of competitors responding to the market investigation
      considered that competition between POS terminal suppliers occurs either at national or at
      “clusters of country” level62 due to, inter alia, local languages (for setting up helpdesk,
      support activities), local terminal protocols (like C-TAP in Benelux), specific “local cards
      like meal vouchers which need to be integrated into the terminal Software to be
      competitive"63
(130) Also with reference to the provision of POS terminals, there seems to be therefore a need
      for a local sales and service presence.
(131) In addition and, even more importantly, there are country (or region specific) technical
      specifications, i.e. the terminal standards or terminal protocols (for example, in the
      Benelux countries, the C-TAP protocol is used in most terminals, whereas most German
      terminals run on the ZVT protocol) which would make the cross-border provision of POS
      terminals more challenging.
61      Form CO, para. 360.
62      See replies to Question 21 of Questionnaire Q4 to Competitors.
63      See replies to Question 21.1 of Questionnaire Q4 to Competitors.
                                                           22

(132) During the market investigation, a competitor stated that "POS terminals in Belgium and
      the Netherlands are using a payment application standard called C-TAP. This application
      can connect to the local processors who have adopted this standard. Generally cross
      border acquirers are using other local standards. This means that a merchant has to
      exchange his terminal in order to connect to a different acquirer."64
(133) This was also revealed by a market participant, which explained that "[..] currently, most
      European countries are using a country specific protocol for terminals. In Belgium, there
      is Acquiris C-TAP protocol which is largely used in Benelux"65
(134) In any event, the precise geographic scope of a possible separate market for the provision
      of POS terminals and related services can be left open as the commitment removing the
      serious doubts regarding merchant acquiring in Belgium, as discussed below, also remove
      doubts that could arise regarding a potential market for POS terminals in Belgium.
IV.3.5. Provision of software for the activities of German network service providers
                   IV.3.5.1.        Previous Commission decisions
(135) The Commission has so far never assessed whether there is a separate market for the
      provision of software for the activities of German network service providers, and hence
      has not assessed the geographic scope of such a market.
(136) In previous decisions, the Commission took the view that the relevant geographic markets
      for application software, including those use in the banking and financial sector, are
      generally at least EEA-wide or worldwide because the solutions were offered on an EEA,
      or even on a global basis. However, the exact geographic market definition was left
      open.66
                   IV.3.5.2.        Notifying Party's view
(137) The Notifying Party submits that the market to which the Poseidon software belongs is at
      least EEA-wide.
                   IV.3.5.3.        Commission's assessment
(138) In the case at hand, Poseidon is tailored to the German card payment systems, specifically
      for the needs of German NSPs. The results of the market investigation also indicate that
      the appropriate geographic dimension may in fact be national.
(139) About half of the respondents to the market investigation consider that a physical
      presence in Germany is necessary to provide software to NSPs. One respondent indicated
      that a "physical presence is absolutely necessary. Most of the specifications are either
      written in German (coming from the German banking sector), or they need an in-depth
      know how of the German payment system to interpret the specifications. This makes it
      very unlikely for a foreign company to develop this." Other market participants list the
      following factors pointing towards a national market: National regulation and access to
      local authorities; support for mission critical processing system, the need for a local
64      See minutes of a call with a competitor, dated 15 January 2016.
65      See minutes of conference call with a market participant, dated 8 February 2016.
66      See M.7458 - IBM/INF Business of Deutsche Lufthansa; M.6166 – Deutsche Börse/NYSE Euronext,
        para. 180.
                                                            23

      marketing team, a good understanding of the German market needs and knowledge and
      experience of the Germany debit market.
(140) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers it likely that this market may indeed
      have a national, i.e. German dimension. In any event, in view of the fact that Worldline is
      the sole supplier of such software, and in all likelihood there is not even a potential other
      supplier, within or beyond Germany, the precise geographic scope of this market can be
      left open, as serious doubts arise under any plausible geographic market definition.
IV.4.     Competitive assessment
(141) On the basis of the above market definitions, and the Parties' activities, the transaction
      results in the following (potentially) affected markets:
           a) Merchant acquiring in Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg;
           b) issuing processing in Germany
           c) a variety of plausible markets to which the processing of iDEAL transactions could
             belong (those are iDEAL processing as a separate product market, all SCT credit
             transactions, e-commerce transactions (or the card-less segment thereof), or
             acquiring processing of card-based transactions (or the web-enabled segment
             thereof);
           d) provision of software for the activities of German NSPs
IV.4.1. Merchant acquiring – Belgium
                    IV.4.1.1.   Notifying Party's view
(142) The Notifying Party submits that both Parties are active in merchant acquiring in
      Belgium, where Worldline holds a historically strong position which is challenged by the
      entry of new market players (such as Paysquare), innovation development, and EU
      regulation fostering liberalisation. The Notifying Party highlights that one of the key
      factors that enabled entry on this market is the implementation of a common and open
      standard protocol (for terminals) enabling dual sourcing and dual acquiring. In addition,
      the Notifying Party attributes the relatively recent entry of a number of competitors also
      to the dual branding of debit cards (in Belgium, practically all debit cards are co-branded
      BCMC and Maestro), allowing for market entrance via Maestro, and the alignment of
      interchange fee for debit cards.
(143) Furthermore, the Notifying Party submits that on the overall market for merchant
      acquiring, Worldline holds a market share of between [80-100] %, whereas Paysquare's
      market share is [0-5] %. Given this small increment, the Notifying Party argues that the
      Transaction cannot give rise to competition concerns.
(144) According to the Notifying Party, this conclusion also holds if the market for merchant
      acquiring were segmented in accordance with the Commission's previous decisions.
(145) In all potential markets in which overlaps occur (POS terminals, web-enabled,
      international card schemes, card schemes by brand, as well as the overall credit and debit
      segments), Worldline has a strong position, ranging from estimated market shares of [50-
      100] %, whereas Paysquare's market share is estimated to vary between [0-10] %,
      depending on the segment.
                                                      24

(146) The Notifying Party argues that in view of the limited increment, and the presence of
      competitors such as Elavon, Easycash (Ingenico), First Data (EMS), B+S and SIX, whose
      market shares the Notifying Party estimates to be [0-10]% in each segment, no
      competition concerns can arise under any plausible market definition.
(147) Lastly, regarding a potential impact of the Transaction on the provisions of terminals by
      Worldline's competitors in this space, the Notifying Party argues that […], and the
      Notifying Party would […].
                  IV.4.1.2.    Commission's assessment
(148) The Commission will set out below its preliminary assessment regarding two related but
      distinct theories of harm resulting from the strengthening of the Parties' presence in
      merchant acquiring in Belgium: Horizontal non-coordinated effects in merchant acquiring
      (and numerous plausible subsegment thereof) and conglomerate (foreclosure) effects
      regarding related markets of merchant acquiring and the provision of POS terminals.
IV.4.1.2.a.       Horizontal non-coordinated effects
Introduction
(149) Under Article 2(2) and (3) of the Merger Regulation, the Commission must assess
      whether a proposed concentration would significantly impede effective competition in the
      internal market or in a substantial part of it, in particular through the creation or
      strengthening of a dominant position.
                                                     25

(150) The Commission guidelines on the assessment of horizontal mergers under the Council
      Regulation on the control of concentrations between undertakings (the "Horizontal
      Merger Guidelines")67 distinguish between two main ways in which mergers between
      actual or potential competitors on the same relevant market may significantly impede
      effective competition, namely non-coordinated and coordinated effects. Non-coordinated
      effects may significantly impede effective competition by eliminating important
      competitive constraints on one or more firms, which consequently would have increased
      market power, without resorting to coordinated behaviour. In that regard, the Horizontal
      Merger Guidelines consider not only the direct loss of competition between the merging
      firms, but also the reduction in competitive pressure on non-merging firms in the same
      market that could be brought about by the merger.
(151) The Horizontal Merger Guidelines list a number of factors which may influence whether
      or not significant non-coordinated effects are likely to result from a merger, such as the
      large market shares of the merging firms, the fact that the merging firms are close
      competitors, the limited possibilities for customers to switch suppliers, or the fact that the
      merger would eliminate an important competitive force. That list of factors applies
      equally if a merger would create or strengthen a dominant position, or would otherwise
      significantly impede effective competition due to non-coordinated effects. Furthermore,
      not all of these factors need to be present to make significant non-coordinated effects
      likely and it is not an exhaustive list.
(152) The Commission will below assess those factors that seem most relevant for the case at
      hand. In its assessment, the Commission will only highlight those instances in which the
      assessment differs from one potential product market (segment) to another – overall, as is
      set out below, serious doubts arise under any plausible product market definition.
The Parties have a large combined market share
(153) According to the Notifying Party, the combined market shares of the Parties in all
      potential product markets in which they overlap were as follows between 2012 and 2014:
67      Guidelines on the assessment of horizontal mergers under the Council Regulation on the control of
        concentrations between undertakings OJC 31, 05.02.2004.
                                                        26


(155) The Commission attempted in the market investigation to reconstruct the market based on
      competitors' sales data.68 While the information obtained indicates that the Form CO is
      mostly accurate in that these competitors are of a similar size as Paysquare in terms of
      market share, the Commission could not validate the sizes of the various potential
      markets as estimated in the Form CO. The data provided by competitors in the course of
      the investigation consistently suggests that the markets are most likely considerably
      smaller than what was submitted by the Notifying Party, with correspondingly larger
      market shares for all competitors, but most importantly with significantly higher market
      shares for Worldline.
(156) This finding is also in line with the internal documents of Worldline. For the debit card
      segment of the merchant acquiring market, for example, internal documents estimate its
      market share above [90-100]% both in 2014 and in 2015, as compared with
      approximately [80-90]% submitted in the Form CO. Similarly, for the credit card market,
      the same documents69 estimates Worldline's market share to be close to [70-80]%,
      whereas the Form CO states that it is between [60-70]% and [70-80]%. The slide below
      illustrates this finding.
      Figure 6: Worldline's estimation of its market share in Belgium
      [...]
      Source:[…]
(157) Paysquare's internal document on the other hand show market share figures in line with
      those contained in the Form CO, estimating its market share for 2014 to be approximately
      [0-5]% for debit transactions and [0-5]% for credit transaction.70 However, the figures for
      2014 do not reflect the fact that Paysquare has since then […]. This signing alone will
      have led to a considerable increase in Paysquare's market share71.
(158) At this stage of the procedure, the Commission does not have complete information of all
      relevant data, and perhaps most importantly, lacks figures for 2015. Nonetheless, it can
      conclude from the data at its disposal that Worldline has very high market shares in all
      potential markets72. According to paragraph 17 of the Horizontal Mergers Guidelines,
      very large market shares of 50% and above may, in themselves, be evidence of the
      existence of a dominant market position. In the case at hand, the Transaction would
      reinforce it by between [0-10]%, depending on the potential market.
(159) Moreover, in addition to these quantitative indicators of market power, the results of the
      market investigation confirm that Worldline – and also Paysquare – are key players in
      merchant acquiring in Belgium. All respondents to the market investigation qualify
      Worldline as the strongest actor in this space, and a large number see Paysquare as the
      number two, whereas other merchant acquirers are mentioned only incidentally.73
68      See replies to Question 5 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors
69      […].
70      […].
71      […].
72      Except for the web-enabled market, for which it also estimates its market share to be [50-60]%.
73      See replies to Question 22 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
                                                           28

(160) In view of the above, the Commission considers for the purposes of the present decision
      that the Parties will have substantial market power to the degree of dominance on all
      relevant potential merchant acquiring markets in Belgium post-merger.
Closeness of competition between the Parties
(161) As indicated by the Notifying Party, in the Form CO, there are a number of competitors
      present in the Belgian market(s) for merchant acquiring. Those mentioned by the
      Notifying Party are Elavon, Easycash, FirstData, B+S and SIX. In addition, the market
      investigation revealed that Adyen, EMS, Nets, Concardis and Europabank are also
      present on this market.74
(162) The Commission attempted in its market investigation to establish how and for which
      customers these companies compete, and whether the Parties are close competitors.
(163) The results of the market investigation indicate that key parameters of competitiveness
      are the possibility to acquire for different card schemes and the price of the acquiring
      services.
(164) The former criterion however is of limited relevance in the case at hand, as most
      merchant acquirers active in Belgium acquire for most of the important card schemes, in
      particular BCMC, Maestro (Mastercard debit), Mastercard and Visa.
(165) There are number of companies such as for example Nets, Easycash (Ingenico) and
      Concardis that seem to only offer acquiring for credit cards. Perhaps most importantly,
      there only very few that offer BCMC acquiring, including Worldline, EMS, Adyen, and
      SIX but not Paysquare.
(166) However, as described above in recital (31), there are strong indications that in particular
      given the fact that virtually all Belgian debit cards are co-branded Maestro and BCMC,
      they are largely substitutable with each other. This is illustrated also by a statement from
      Worldline's internal documents […] 75
(167) For these reasons, in terms of the criterion offering acquiring for various (and popular)
      card schemes, most merchant acquirers active in Belgium are largely comparable, with
      the exception of those that are only active in the credit card segment.
(168) As for the criterion of price, as set out in more detail below in recitals (188), Paysquare
      appears to have been offering particularly competitive prices for acquiring services, but
      the market investigation has not been conclusive on Worldline's behaviour as regards
      prices.76
74      See for example replies to Question 10 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
75      […].
76      See replies to Questions 23, 24 and 31 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors. See also replies to Questions
        15-16, Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers.
                                                          29

(169) In addition, the results of the market investigation also indicate that the ability to combine
      merchant acquiring services with the provision and maintenance of POS terminals is
      important, notably for smaller retailers.77
(170) In Belgium, most acquirers, including the Parties are able to do so – either because they
      are able to provide terminals themselves, or because they cooperate with a terminal
      provider. However, some do not – such as Europabank, Concardis or Nets for example. 78
(171) Furthermore, some respondents to the market investigation indicate as a weakness for SIX
      and B+S that they cannot acquire from terminals that run on the C-TAP protocol, the
      dominant POS terminal protocol in Belgium79. This means that those two players can
      offer the bundle – terminals and acquiring – but cannot offer acquiring from Worldline or
      CCV terminals, the vast majority of the installed terminal base.
(172) Finally, some of these competitors focus only on particular types of retailers, such as
      Adyen for example on large multinationals, or have only "followed" retailers from other
      Member States into Belgium, and are therefore, at least for most customers, not to be
      considered as close competitors to the Parties80.
(173) In view of the above, the Commission cannot conclude that the Parties are particularly
      close competitors. In fact, given the significant scale of Worldline s on the market and its
      extended product and service offering, none of the companies currently active could be
      considered as a particularly close competitor. However, the market investigation indicated
      that Paysquare was one of the most credible and well equipped companies to
      competitively challenge Worldline established position, by aggressively competing
      against the incumbent see paragraphs (188) to (192) below.
Customers have limited possibilities of switching suppliers
(174) The results of the market investigation indicate that, while many customers have
      (considered) switching their merchant acquirer during the last three years81, and there is
      an important hurdle to doing so, as it seems to entail either the switching of the POS
      terminal, or at least requires an intervention from the terminal provider.82
(175) The Notifying Party submits that Belgium is one of the few markets in the EU in which
      payment terminals are so-called multi-acquirers, which according to the Notifying Party
      means that merchants can accept multiple cards with different acquirers of their choice
      from the same payment terminal. As such, that should mean that terminals cannot be an
      obstacle for a merchant to switch merchant acquirer.
(176) However, the results of the market investigation and the Parties' internal documents cast
      doubts on this conclusion.
77      See replies to Question 23 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors. See also replies to Questions 32 and 38,
        Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers.
78      See replies to Question 39 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
79      See replies to Question 24 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
80      See replies to Question 24 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors. See also email of a competitor received on
        6 April 2016.
81      See replies to Question 13 of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers.
82      See replies to Question 12 and 12.1 of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers.
                                                           30

(177) While almost all competitors confirm that C-TAP terminals are able to multi-acquire83,
      most of them indicate that Worldline has to "open" its terminals before other merchant
      acquirers can access them. "It was not easy to convince Worldline to "open" the terminals
      in order to make this change possible, i.e have [Y] as acquirer for its Worldline
      terminals. In [X]'s view, for a retailer to be technically able to have another acquirer it
      would need access to the terminal's software (an OS ("operating system") owned in this
      case by Worldline) and the terminal's keys. Both of these components deal with
      fundamental elements such as the cash register and the contact with the acquirer.
      Sometimes some of the changes necessary to link a terminal to a different acquirer, as
      well as other terminal-related services, can be dealt with in a remote fashion, but
      whenever this is not possible, new terminals have to be ordered and delivered. "84 .
(178) This means that terminal suppliers, such as Worldline, are able to prevent or at least
      considerably slow down the switching from one merchant acquirer to another, as also
      illustrated by the following statement from a competitor of the Parties: "[X] always need
      an intervention of the terminal supplier to add/change the identification data of
      Merchants in the TMS (Terminal Management System) of the terminal supplier. As
      Worldline is a terminal supplier and acquirer we need to inform our most important
      competitor with the information of all our (new) merchants using devices of Worldline.
      Sometimes it is difficult to get the merchant data of an [X] merchant changed in the TMS
      of Worldline, especially if the merchant is a former client (merchant) of Worldline. We
      always need to contact Worldline by Phone and inform their on our merchant base."85
(179) Customers also confirm that a terminal supplier can make switching to another merchant
      acquirer a difficult exercise, stating for example that "the main obstacle [to switch] is the
      link between payment terminal type and possibility to change acquirer. Most of the time
      you need to change the terminal if you want to change acquirer, meaning extra
      investment on material which is still in your books", and "we do own the terminals...even
      if you can't do anything with these if you change your acquirer".86
(180) The importance of terminals to prevent merchants from switching to alternative merchant
      acquirers is probably best illustrated by […].87
Figure 7: [….]
[…]
Source: […]
(181) Worldline's retention strategy seems to have be refined gradually, and, seemingly
      recognising the importance of terminal maintenance services for retention purposes,
      […]88.
83       See replies to Question 45 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
84       See non-confidential minutes of a call with a customer, 27 January 2016.
85       See replies to Question 7 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
86       See replies to Question 30 of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers.
87       […].
88       […].
                                                            31

(182) The success of this strategy was supported by the results of the market investigation. Of
      those customers who tried to switch the merchant acquirer while keeping the terminal
      provider, the majority indicates that this was not possible.89
(183) In view of the above, the description of the situation that one customer provided seems
      largely accurate. It explained that "six years ago in Belgium it was "painful" to switch
      from Atos (the historical operator) to another acquirer. [X] explains that as long as a
      merchant has an Atos terminal, switching to another acquirer is very burdensome, and
      time/cost intensive. According to [X]'s knowledge, other retailers attempted to switch
      acquirer but failed because they retained Atos terminals. As a results, in essence,
      merchants have to change everything (the terminals in the first place) if they want to
      change acquirer.
(184) The Commission therefore considers that terminal providers such as Worldline can
      considerably delay or even prevent their customers from switching merchant acquirers.
      Given that the Worldline controls at least [60-70]%, if not more, of the installed terminal
      base,90 this constitutes an important means to hinder customers from changing merchant
      acquirers. Delaying or preventing the switching of customers is commercially rational –
      as one customer explained, "Worldline would be reluctant to allow such a move
      [switching acquirers / "opening" terminals]more frequently because it cuts Worldline´s
      own business as an acquirer".91
(185) For the above reasons, the Commission considers that merchant acquiring customers of
      the Parties, in particular if they are also terminal customers of Worldline, have only
      limited possibilities of switching their supplier of merchant acquiring service providers.
Merged entity able to hinder expansion by competitors
(186) The market investigation also attempted to establish whether the Parties could be in a
      position to hinder the expansion of competitors. Approximately half of the respondents
      consider that this is the case, quoting again in particular the possibility of Worldline to
      block or hinder competitors' access to Worldline terminals, as described in the previous
      section, as the key factor that enables the Parties to do so.92
(187) For this reason, the Commission considers that the Parties are, to some extent, capable of
      hindering the expansion of competitors.
Merger eliminates an important competitive force
(188) The results of the market investigation also suggest that the Transaction could result in
      the elimination of an important competitive force. Approximately half of the respondents
      to the market investigation, both customers and competitors, characterise PaySquare as
      competing particularly aggressively93. For example, one competitor explained that
      "Paysquare is one of the few acquirers able to compete with Worldline in Tier 1 and 2
89      See replies to Question 39 of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers.
90      See replies to Question 43 and 44 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
91      See minutes of a call with a customer, 27 January 2016.
92      See replies to Question 29 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
93      See replies to Question 20 of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers, and Question 29 of Questionnaire
        Q4 to competitors.
                                                           32

      segments", while another stated that "Paysquare offer particularly competitive pricing
      and have often provided a significantly lower bid for opportunities in Belgium."94
(189) Even those that do not perceive Paysquare as being particularly aggressive acknowledge
      that it exerts competitive pressure on Worldline. One customer which did not characterise
      Paysquare as aggressive explained that it "broke up a monopolistic market dominated by
      Atos", while another stated that when it wanted to switch acquirer, "Paysquare came with
      a strong proposal in all sense (payment scheme processes, online reporting, innovative
      solutions as well as pricing)."95
(190) […].96
(191) […].97
(192) […].98
(193) In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction would eliminate an
      importance competitive force.
Conclusion
(194) As set out above, a number of factors indicate that the Transaction will result in non-
      coordinated horizontal effects.
IV.4.1.2.b.          Conglomerate effects
Introduction
(195) The Commission guidelines on the assessment of non-horizontal mergers under the
      Council Regulation on the control of concentrations between undertakings (the "Non-
      horizontal Merger Guidelines")99 explain in paragraph 91 that conglomerate mergers are
      mergers between firms that are neither in a purely horizontal nor in a purely vertical
      relationship.
(196) In the case at hand, the Commission considers that the markets of merchant acquiring and
      the provision of POS terminals in Belgium are related markets in the sense of the non-
      horizontal Merger Guidelines, given that the customers are the same, and buy both
      merchant acquiring services and terminals for the same purpose, namely to be able accept
      card payment from consumers.
94      See replies to Question 29 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors.
95      See replies to Question 20 of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers
96      […].
97      […].
98      […].
99      Guidelines on the assessment of non-horizontal mergers under the Council Regulation on the control of
        concentrations between undertakings OJC 265, 18.10.2008.
                                                           33

(197) The main concern in the context of a conglomerate merger is that of foreclosure. The
      combination of products in related markets may confer on the merged entity the ability
      and incentive to leverage a strong market position from one market to another, for
      example by means of bundling. In certain circumstance, such practices may reduce the
      competitive pressure on the merged entity allowing it to increase prices.
(198) In the present case, Worldline has very high market shares in two closely related markets,
      namely the provision of POS terminals (at least [60-70]%, probably higher), and
      merchant acquiring (approximately [90-100]%). The Transaction would further
      strengthen Worldline's position on the merchant acquiring market. The Commission
      therefore has to assess whether this would provide it with the (enhanced) ability and
      incentive to (partially) foreclose competitors from the terminal provision market in
      Belgium.
Ability to foreclose
(199) Firstly, the Commission notes that bundling of terminals and merchant acquiring services
      is a common practice in Belgium. The results of the market investigation indicate that
      most merchant acquirers, albeit not all, offer also terminals, either by themselves or in
      partnership with a terminal provider.100
(200) Customers responding to the market investigation confirm the answers received from
      competitors, and point to certain advantages of being offered a bundle, such as to have
      one central service desk. When problems occur, it is sometimes not easy to detect if it is
      caused by the terminal or the merchant acquirer / acquiring processor, and therefore it is
      beneficial to have one contact only.101 On the other hand, customers have also identified
      certain benefits of buying these products and services separately, such as for example the
      possibility to negotiate overall better conditions and prices. Customers also indicate that
      switching acquirer is easier when it is not the same company as the terminal provider.102
(201) Consistent with this balance of advantages and disadvantages of buying separately or in a
      bundle, the results of the market investigation indicate that at least half of customers
      purchase the combinations, whereas the other half prefers to buy separately. 103 There are
      also indications that larger and more sophisticated retailers buy separately, whereas SMEs
      typically prefer to work with a one stop shop.104
(202) Secondly, the Commission recalls, as set out above in section IV.4.1, that Worldline is
      dominant in the merchant acquiring market, and the Transaction would further strengthen
      this dominance. With a [60-70]% or more market share in the terminals market,
      Worldline exerts significant market power in this market as well. According to paragraph
      99 of the non-horizontal Merger Guidelines, a significant degree of market power is
      needed for a company to successfully foreclose a competitor from a related market. The
100     See replies to Questions 39, 46 and 47 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors
101     See replies to Questions 32, 38 and 38.1 of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers.
102     See replies to Question 32of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers.
103     See replies to Question 31of Questionnaire Q1 to Belgian customers. Half of the customers responding to
        the market investigation buy separately. However, one competitor estimates that less than 10% of the
        market buys terminals separately from acquiring services (minutes of a call with a competitor, 22
        February 2016).
104     See minutes of a call with a competitor, 22 February 2016.
                                                           34

      market investigation indicated that Worldline is already leveraging its strong market
      position both in merchant acquiring and in terminals to propose bundles to its customers.
(203) Thirdly, as described above in section IV.2.4, the results of the market investigation
      indicate that there is a large common pool of customers, meaning customers that buy or
      would considering buying both terminals and merchant acquiring services out of one
      hand. This is another factor to be taken into account by the Commission for foreclosure
      effects in conglomerate mergers to be a concern.105 While larger and more sophisticated
      customers reported that they can, with some difficulty and resistance from Worldline, and
      as set out above as of recital (174), unbundle the two offerings to obtain better prices or
      servicing conditions from different suppliers, for smaller customers having Worldline as
      merchant acquirer or terminal provider, the initial investment to look for cheaper
      alternatives to the bundle in terms of technical complexity and risk of unsuccessful
      integration is too high compared to the savings they could obtain going forward.
(204) In view of the above, it is likely that Worldline already has the ability to partially
      foreclose terminal competitors today. As the Transaction would strengthen Worldline
      dominance in merchant acquiring, it would also strengthen Worldline's ability to foreclose
      rivals on the terminal market in Belgium.
Incentive to foreclose
(205) According to paragraph 105 of the non-horizontal Merger Guidelines, the incentive to
      foreclose depends on the overall profitability of the strategy. In the case at hand, it means
      in particular that is necessary to determine whether it may be profitable for the Parties to
      sell either terminals or merchant acquiring services at lower cost than what they would
      charge separately, in order to increase or defend their market share, notably in the
      terminal market.
(206) […] this may already be profitable now, and […] the Transaction would further increase
      the incentive of the Parties to foreclose terminals competitors.
(207) […].106
(208) Conversely, as described as of recital (174), terminals can also function as retention tools
      for merchant acquiring customers. […].107
(209) In view of the above, it would seem that, depending on the customer and the current
      circumstances on the market, Worldline already has the incentive to leverage its position
      in merchant acquiring to sell more terminals, or sell more terminals at low cost to retain
      or increase its market share in merchant acquiring.
        Likely impact on prices and choice
(210) At the outset, the Commission notes that Paysquare cooperates today with a terminal
      provider […] that is Worldline's largest competitor in the terminal market.
105     See in particular paragraph 100 of the non-horizontal Merger Guidelines.
106     […].
107     […].
                                                           35

(211) As a result of the transaction, it is likely that Worldline could and would also make the
      former Paysquare customers a terminal offer "a terminal offer they can't refuse ".108
(212) Once equipped with Worldline terminals, these could in turn be used, to make the
      switching to a different merchant acquirer (or terminal provider), even more difficult.
(213) As a result, not only would Worldline's position be strengthened in both the merchant
      acquiring and the terminals market, but it is also likely that terminal competitors could
      exercise a less effective constraint, which could ultimately enable Worldline to increase
      prices, on both markets.
IV.4.1.2.c.       Conclusion
(214) As set out above, the Transaction entails the presence of a number of factors that indicate
      that it would result in non-coordinated horizontal effects.
(215) Moreover, given the already very strong position of Worldline on both the merchant
      acquiring and the terminal provision market in Belgium, it cannot be excluded that the
      Transaction would strengthen its ability further to successfully and implement a
      foreclosure strategy on the market for the provision of terminals in Belgium.
(216) For the above reasons, the Commission considers that the Transaction raises serious
      doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market on the Belgian market for merchant
      acquiring.
IV.4.2. Merchant acquiring – Netherlands
                  IV.4.2.1.     Notifying Party's view
(217) According to the Notifying Party, the transaction will only result in affected plausible
      markets in the credit segment of merchant acquiring in the Netherlands, where the
      combined market shares would be [20-30]% and [20%-40]% respectively.
(218) In the overall market for merchant acquiring in the Netherlands, it estimates the combined
      market share of the Parties to be below [0-5]%.
(219) According to the Notifying Party, the very small combined market share in the overall
      merchant acquiring market is explained by the dominance of the debit segment in the
      Netherlands, where the Parties are hardly present and where various Dutch banks account
      for most of the debit transactions. The Notifying Party estimates that [5-10]% of all card
      payments are made with a credit card in the Netherlands.
(220) In view of the insignificant size of the credit segment, the Notifying Party submits that the
      Transaction should not be assessed at this level.
(221) In any event, the Notifying Party submits that on this market segments it faces a large
      number of competitors, and that accordingly, the Transaction could not possibly give rise
      to competition concerns.
108     […].
                                                     36

                     IV.4.2.2.      Commission's assessment
        No horizontal non-coordinated effects
(222) The Commission notes that the results of the market investigation broadly confirm the
      Notifying Party's estimates of the Parties' market shares: On the overall merchant
      acquiring markets, Dutch banks hold the lion's share, whereas for the credit cards
      segments, Paysquare, EMS, and Worldline are seen as the strongest/largest players by
      most respondents.109
(223) However, even on these market segments, there a sizable number of other suppliers are
      active, according to customers, including Elavon, SIX, CCV, EMS, Adyen, B+S,
      Concardis.110
(224) The market investigation was inconclusive as to the closeness of competition between the
      Parties: While some customers mentioned the respective other Party when asked about
      the best alternative, the majority indicated that other merchant acquirers such EMS, SIX,
      B+S and Concardis would be the preferred alternative option,111 and hence arguably a
      closer competitor.
(225) Similarly, when asked which other merchant acquirers they refer to as potential
      alternatives in negotiations with current or potential suppliers, customers mentioned the
      Parties, but also EMS, Elavon, and SIX.112
(226) Overall, there seem to be a sizable number of merchant acquirers active in the
      Netherlands which offer comparable services. The market investigation indicated that
      none of the merchant acquirers, including the Parties, holds particular market power in the
      Netherlands in the credit segment, which is reflected in the relatively modest market
      shares in this segment. As indicated above, the credit segment is the only one where the
      Parties have a meaningful presence, and is overall only a small fraction of the overall
      merchant acquiring market.
(227) Against this background, it is not surprising that a clear majority of customers consider
      that sufficient alternative suppliers would remain after the Transaction.113 In the same
      vein, only one competitor and one customer expect price to increase as a result of the
      transaction, whereas a significant number of customers even anticipates a decrease in
      prices.114
(228) Finally, hardly any customer or competitor that responded to the market investigation
      expects an impact on its company as a result of the Transaction.115
109     See replies to question 58 of Questionnaire Q 4 to competitors.
110     See replies to question 8 of Questionnaire Q 2 to Dutch customers.
111     See replies to question 8 of Questionnaire Q 2 to Dutch customers.
112     See replies to question 19 of Questionnaire Q 2 to Dutch customers.
113     See replies to question 20 of Questionnaire Q 2 to Dutch customers.
114     See replies to question 23 of Questionnaire Q 2 to Dutch customers, and replies to question 65 of
        Questionnaire Q 4 to competitors.
115     See replies to question 22 of Questionnaire Q 2 to Dutch customers, and replies to question 77 of
        Questionnaire Q 4 to competitors.
                                                            37

(229) In view of the above, the Commission considers that no serious doubts as to the
      compatibility with the internal market arise as a result of the Transaction with respect to
      merchant acquiring (and the credit cards segments thereof) in the Netherlands.
        No conglomerate (foreclosure) effects
(230) Conversely to the situation in Belgium as described above, in particular in section
      IV.4.1.2.b the Parties only hold an insignificant market share in the merchant acquiring
      market, which is dominated by Dutch banks.
(231) For this reason alone, it seems unlikely that the Parties could foreclose competitors from
      the market for the provision of POS terminals in the Netherlands.
(232) In view of the above, the Commission considers that no serious doubts as to the
      compatibility with the internal market arise as a result of the Transaction with respect to
      the market for the provision of POS terminals in the Netherlands.
IV.4.3. Merchant acquiring - Luxembourg
                   IV.4.3.1.    Notifying Party's view
(233) The Notifying Party submits that the combined market shares of the Parties on the
      affected plausible markets of merchant acquiring in Luxembourg are modest, and the
      increment resulting from the transaction is always [0-5]%.
(234) More specifically, the Notifying Party submits that on the overall merchant acquiring
      market, the Parties hold a combined market share of less than [10-20]%. Affected markets
      arise in the plausible markets for POS acquiring (market share approximately [20-30]%,
      but with an increment of [0-5]%), as well as the Visa and Mastercard segments, with
      estimated market shares between [10-30]%, and an increment of [0-5]%.
(235) Furthermore, the Notifying Party submits that Paysquare is not really active in
      Luxembourg, […].
(236) The Notifying Party also points to the fact that Luxembourg does not have a domestic
      payment scheme any longer, and is as a result a particularly open market.
(237) Finally, it submits that the Parties face strong competitors, and notably SIX, with a market
      share of [70-90]% of the overall merchant acquiring, as well as other firms such as
      Elavon and Catella.
(238) In view of the above, the Notifying Party submits that no competition concerns can arise
      as a result of the Transaction.
                   IV.4.3.2.    Commission's assessment
(239) According to paragraph 18 of the horizontal Merger Guidelines, concentrations leading to
      a combined market share of less than 25% are unlikely to impede effective competition.
                                                     38

(240) The Commission notes that the results of the market investigation broadly confirm the
      estimates of the market shares submitted by the Notifying Party, and considers that in no
      plausible merchant acquiring market would this amount to more than 25%.116
(241) In qualitative terms, the results of the market investigation indicate that Worldline and
      Paysquare are both minor challengers of SIX, among a number of others such as B+S,
      Catella, Concardis and Elavon.117
(242) In addition, not a single customer and only a sole competitor expect an adverse impact or
      an increase in price resulting from the Transaction.118
(243) In view of the above, the Commission considers that no serious doubts as to the
      compatibility with the internal market arise as a result of the Transaction, with respect to
      merchant acquiring (and the plausible Visa or Mastercard market segments thereof) in
      Luxembourg.
IV.4.4. Issuing processing – Germany
                     IV.4.4.1.      Notifying Party's view
(244) The Notifying Party submits that, in Germany 80-85% of all card transactions are
      processed by banks internally, in particular as regards debit transactions under the
      domestic scheme. External service providers such as Worldline and Equens, only
      undertake and compete for the issuing processing of international card transactions.
(245) The Notifying Party submits that, if the overall market for issuing processing in Germany,
      including activities performed internally by banks, are considered, the level of combined
      market shares of the Parties is very low ([5-10]% with an increment of [0-5]%).
(246) If the transactions that are processed internally by banks directly or by bank owned
      entities are excluded (as the Parties and other external providers do not compete for the
      processing of these transactions), an affected market arises (the Parties’ combined market
      share will be approximately [40-50]%). However, in the Notifying Party’s view, Equens
      only brings a very small increment ([0-5] %), performing issuing processing for one
      customer ([…]) in Germany.
                        a) With respect to […] cards, the Notifying Party points out that these
                             cards can be attributed either to the international scheme as they use the
                             MasterCard brand or to the domestic debit scheme, as they are issued
                             by […]. In addition, according to the Notifying Party, […] cards are
                             technically neither debit nor credit cards, as they are prepaid.
(247) Finally, the Notifying Party reports the presence on this market of significant and sizeable
      competitors (namely First Data with a market share of [20-40]% and TSYS ([10-30]%)
      that compete with Worldline for the issuing of international card transactions, […].
(248) Based on the above, the Notifying Party submits that no competition concerns will arise
      as a result of the Transaction.
116     See replies to Questionnaire Q 3 to customers in Luxembourg.
117     See replies to questions 91 and 93 of Questionnaire Q 4 to competitors.
118     See replies to questions 97 of Questionnaire Q 4 to competitors, and replies to questions 22 and 23 of
        Questionnaire Q 3 to customers in Luxembourg.
                                                           39

                    IV.4.4.2.       Commission's assessment
(249) The results of the market investigation supported the Parties’ claim that no serious doubts
      arise as a result of the Transaction on the potential market for issuing processing in
      Germany.
(250) First, the results of the market investigation indicated that external service providers like
      the Parties, only compete for the issuing processing of credit card based transactions in
      Germany.
(251) In this respect, a market participant explained that German Banks outsource the issuing
      processing of credit cards transactions to external companies such as Worldline, but
      process debit card transactions in-house.119
(252) Second, the market investigation also revealed that Equens is at the most a very minor
      player: Among the various alternatives to Worldline when it comes to issuing processing
      of credit card transactions in Germany that were mentioned in the market investigation
      (First Data, TSYS, Bayern Card Services (BCS), Plus Card);120 Equens did not feature.
(253) The reason for this may be that […] [an operator] explained that their cards are not fully
      comparable to credit cards ([…]) and that even so, “they would be able to move away
      from the merged entity and switch to an alternative issuing processor, i.e., First Data,
      Ingenico or any other processor that would fit their needs.”121
(254) In conclusion, as stated by a German bank during the market investigation, the
      Transaction will not change the situation in the issuing processing space in Germany, as
      “Equens is not present in the market for issuing processing of credit card transactions”
      and the credit card market is quite small and fragmented in Germany (compared to other
      European states), “thus the impact of the transaction will be even less significant."122
(255) In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not raise
      serious doubts as to its compatibility to the internal market with respect to issuing
      processing in Germany.
IV.4.5. iDEAL processing – and plausible markets to which it could belong
                    IV.4.5.1.       Notifying Party's view
(256) The Notifying Party submits that the Parties activities would lead to the following
      potentially affected markets:
(257) For SCT processing, if it were defined at Eurozone level, the combined market share
      would be approximately [20-30]%, with an increment of [0-5]%.123
(258) In other plausible markets, notably in (card-less) e-commerce transactions or web-enabled
      acquiring processing, the Parties' activities do not overlap, but the Notifying Party
119     See minutes of call with a customer, dated 17 February 2016.
120     See minutes of call with a customer, dated 17 February 2016.
121     See minutes of call with a customer, dated 17 February 2016.
122     See minutes of call with a customer, dated 17 February 2016.
123     No affected market would arise if the relevant market for SCT processing is defined at EEA or EU level.
                                                           40

      submits that Equens terminated discussions with a Dutch bank about becoming its iDEAL
      processor in view of the Transaction.
(259) Only if national markets were defined for acquiring processing including both card-based
      and card-less payments, the combined market share in the Netherlands would be [80-
      100]%, with an increment of [0-10]%, […].
(260) The Notifying Party also submits that Worldline's current position regarding the
      processing of iDEAL payments, […], results from winning a public tender published
      Dutch banks […]. Recently however, another company, PPRO, was approved as iDEAL
      processor, and several other competitors have announced their intention to start offering
      iDEAL processing.
(261) In view of the limited market shares in the plausible markets in which the Parties' overlap,
      and the existence of alternative potential iDEAL processors, the Notifying Party submits
      that no serious doubts can arise as a result of the Transaction.
                     IV.4.5.2.     Commission's assessment
(262) The responses to the market investigation indicate clearly that the Transaction cannot give
      rise to serious doubts, in particular as both customers and competitors do not expect the
      Transaction to have an adverse impact on customers.124
(263) Regarding a possible overall market for acquiring processing for card-based payments
      and the iDEAL processing of card-less payments in the Netherlands, the Parties would
      have a high market share of approximately [80-100]%, but be very distant competitors as
      in fact they offer completely different products – Equens acquiring processing of card-
      based transactions, and Worldline processing of iDEAL card-less transactions.
      Accordingly, they also have (to some extent) different customers – for Equens, it is
      merchants or merchant acquirers, whereas for Worldline it is Dutch banks participating in
      iDEAL. Most importantly, it seems extremely unlikely that the increment stemming
      exclusively from the addition of iDEAL processing customers would in any way
      strengthen Equens market power in this space.
(264) Were the relevant market defined as comprising the processing of SCT transactions in the
      Eurozone, the market shares would be very modest ([20-25]%), and there would be a
      number of sizable competitors such as STET, SIA, Iberpay, EBA or Vocalink. Moreover,
      the increment would be small ([0-5]%), […].
(265) Irrespective of the market definition, the results of the market investigation indicate that
      there has been at least one recent entrant – PPRO – which offers iDEAL processing.125
      Moreover, those companies that have participated in tenders in the past to become iDEAL
      processors (possibly including as many as MaxCode, Wordline, Payplaza, Ingenico,
      Adyen, Six and First Data)126, could in all likelihood also start offering iDEAL
      processing, should a commercial opportunity arise.
124     See replies to Question 82 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors, and replies of customers to questions of
        the Commission, received on 9 and 10 March.
125     See replies to Question 79 of Questionnaire Q4 to competitors, and replies of customers to questions of
        the Commission, received on 9 and 10 March.
126     See replies of customers to questions of the Commission, received on 9 and 10 March
                                                          41

(266) The loss of potential competition resulting from the Transaction, either on the potentially
      affected markets, or on those that are not affected, is therefore in the Commission's view
      not significant, as many potential competitors remain, and the Transaction will only
      eliminate one of them.
(267) For the above reasons, the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
      compatibility with the common market in the potential markets of processing iDEAL,
      card-based, SCT or e-commerce transactions.
IV.4.6. Provision of software for the activities of German NSPs
Introduction
(268) The Non-horizontal Merger Guidelines explain in paragraph 29 that a merger is said to
      result in foreclosure where actual or potential rivals' access to supplies or markets is
      hampered or eliminated as a result of the merger, thereby reducing the companies' ability
      and incentives to compete. Such foreclosure may discourage entry or expansion of rivals
      or encourage their exit. The foreclosure strategy can take the form of input foreclosure or
      customers' foreclosure. In the context of the proposed transaction, the Commission will
      focus solely on input foreclosure, as customer foreclosure is evidently not a concern in
      view of Equens lack of upstream presence.
(269) According to paragraph 31 of the Non-horizontal Merger Guidelines input foreclosure
      arises where post-merger, the new entity would be likely to restrict access to the products
      or services that it would have otherwise supplied absent the merger, thereby raising its
      downstream rivals' costs by making it harder for them to obtain supplies of the input
      under similar prices and conditions as absent the merger. This may lead the merged entity
      to profitably increase the price charged to consumers, resulting in a significant
      impediment to effective competition. The analysis of the input foreclosure requires an
      assessment of the ability and the incentives of the merged entity to refuse access to input.
(270) Worldline holds a nearly monopolistic position on the upstream market for software for
      the activities of German NSPs. Worldline is currently not active as NSP. PaySquare
      market share on the downstream market for NSP activities, for which merchant acquiring
      is a proxy, is approximately [5-10]%, and [5-10]% on the domestic card scheme segment
      (which accounts for the vast majority card transactions in Germany).
                   IV.4.6.1.    Notifying Party's view
(271) In the Notifying Party's view there will be […]. Worldline's licensing activity of Poseidon
      generates revenue of around EUR […] per year among which those of PaySquare
      represent approximately […].
(272) According to the Notifying Party, Worldline continuously invests to upgrade its software
      solutions (new functionalities, innovations, etc.) and therefore has a strong incentive to
      release new software versions to all customers at the same time, and to as many as
      possible, so as to recoup its investments as quickly as possible.
                   IV.4.6.2.    Commission's assessment
Ability to foreclose access to inputs
                                                     42

(273) In the market investigation, the Commission tested whether Worldline would be able post
      transaction to raise the licensing fees it charges to PaySquare's competitors or to make the
      conditions of access to Poseidon/WLP less favourable for competitors than for PaySquare
      in terms of technology updates or functionalities.
(274) The overwhelming majority of the customers indicated that Worldline could provide its
      NSP subsidiary PaySquare with a competitive advantage, for example by providing it
      with a better version, better service, earlier updates or a tailor made functionality of
      Poseidon/WLP; it could also discriminate in terms of price.127
(275) One respondent to the market investigation pointed out that "o f course Worldline can bill
      lower charges to Paysquare and nobody will see that",128 whereas another explained that
      "due to the [85-90]% market share of Poseidon there is a direct Impact on PaySquare's
      competitors caused by Poseidon, either economically (Price market vs. Price paysquare),
      service quality and/ or product development and availability (e.g. paysquare first), new
      functionalities and/ or IPRs."129
(276) Similarly, another customer indicated that "Worldline could provide new functionalities/
      better service earlier to Paysquare"130 and a fourth customer stated that "Worldline could
      disadvantage other competitors of PaySquare by delaying the roll-out of products and
      functionalities since each customer maintains its own software application pack on the
      Software platform of Worldline."131
(277) As explained above in section IV.4.6, should such discrimination in terms of price or
      service occur, Worldline's customer would have very limited possibilities to react, in
      particular given that there are no alternatives on the market and that the development of
      an alternative to Poseidon would require significant time and investment.132. Customers
      will not have the possibility to develop an alternative solution since the software is de
      facto industry standard in Germany. Almost all terminals in Germany are connected via
      Worldline's ZVT protocol. The results of the market investigation indicated that without
      opening the protocol will be impossible to develop an alternative software solution with
      the full functionality of the Poseidon software.133
(278) In view of the above, the Commission considers that Wordline will have the ability to
      discriminate between NSPs and favour PaySquare's activities in terms of price and
      services regarding the provision of the Poseidon software and its modules.
Incentives to foreclose access to inputs
(279) In order to assess whether foreclosure could effectively take place, the Commission has to
      analyse if such strategy would be profitable. In the case at hand, the size of the
      downstream market for merchant acquiring of transactions under the domestic card
      scheme is EUR […] million in 2014, according to the Notifying Party. The market
127     See replies to Questions 12 and 13 of Questionnaire Q6 to NSPs.
128     See replies to Question 12.1 of Questionnaire Q6 to NSPs.
129     See replies to Question 12.1 of Questionnaire Q6 to NSPs.
130     See replies to Question 13.1 of Questionnaire Q6 to NSPs.
131     See replies to Question 13.1 of Questionnaire Q6 to NSPs.
132     See replies to Question 14 of Questionnaire Q6 to NSPs.
133     See replies to Question 7 of Questionnaire Q6 to NSPs.
                                                           43

      investigation revealed that Poseidon is also largely used for the provision of merchant
      acquiring services for all major international card schemes at POS terminals. The size of
      the overall market for POS segment of merchant acquiring is estimated by the Notifying
      Party at EUR […] in 2014.
(280) As mentioned earlier, the revenue generated by the licensing fees of Poseidon/WLP on
      the upstream market is estimated at EUR […]. Given the rather limited revenue generated
      on the upstream market and the comparatively very large size of downstream market, it is
      very likely that Worldline will have the incentive to forgo part of the revenue it obtains in
      the upstream market in order to favour the activities of PaySquare on the downstream
      market with the aim to gain market share.
(281) On the basis of the above, the Commission considers that Wordline will also have the
      incentive to discriminate between NSPs and favour PaySquare's activities in terms of
      price and services regarding the provision of the Poseidon software and its modules.
Conclusion
(282) As presented above, there are several elements that indicate that the Transaction may lead
      to non-horizontal effects, namely input foreclosure regarding the market for software for
      the activities of German NSPs. The Commission considers therefore that the Transaction
      raises serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market.
V.       PROPOSED REMEDIES
(283) In order to render the concentration compatible with the internal market, the undertakings
      concerned have modified the notified concentration by entering into the following
      commitments, which are annexed to this decision and form an integral part thereof.
V.1.     Commitments submitted by the Notifying Party
(284) In order to render the concentration compatible with the internal market, the Notifying
      Party submitted a set of commitments under Article 6(2) of the Merger Regulation on 30
      March 2016 ("Initial Commitments").
(285) The Commission market tested the Initial Commitments in order to assess whether they
      are sufficient and suitable to remedy the serious doubts identified in the market for
      merchant acquiring services in Belgium and on the market for the provision of software
      for the activities of NSPs in Germany.
(286) Following the market test, amended commitments were submitted on 19 April 2016
      ("Final Commitments"). The Final Commitments are annexed to this decision and form
      an integral part thereof.
V.1.1.   Initial Commitments
(287) The Initial Commitments consisted of two parts - one aimed at addressing the
      Commission's serious doubts in relation to the market for merchant acquiring in Belgium
      and the other relating to the market for the provision of software for the activities of NSPs
      in Germany.
         Merchant acquiring market in Belgium
(288) The Initial Commitments consisted of the divestiture of the merchant acquiring business
      of Paysquare in Belgium. It included in particular the transfer of customers contracts
                                                    44

      entered into by PaySquare, all the sales partnership agreements entered into by PaySquare
      on the market for merchant acquiring in Belgium and all corresponding merchant data and
      records, and the relevant personnel. At the option of the purchaser, the Notifying Party
      offered an Interim Service Arrangements for transaction processing, customer and
      acquirer servicing (such as call centre and fraud handling), continued technical product
      management, scheme licenses and payment institutions licenses.
(289) The Notifying Party also offered at the option of the purchaser to facilitate the transfer
      processing contracts with third party service providers. The Divestment Business did not
      include trademarks, service marks and brands, non-Belgian business, processing and
      product management as well as scheme and payment institution licenses.
         Provision of software for the activities of NSPs in Germany
(290) The Initial Commitments also entailed the granting of a license for Poseidon and its
      modules to third-party NSPs under fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory ("FRAND")
      terms and particularly, on no less favourable terms than the ones granted to PaySquare
      during a period of 10 years as from the effective date and under the supervision of a
      licensing trustee. Furthermore, the Notifying Party committed to:
          a. cap the software maintenance fee (for a period limited to the next 5 years);
          b. provide maintenance services under FRAND terms and notably to serve third
               party NSPs in priority vis-à-vis PaySquare in case of shortage, with reinforced
               monitoring by an ad hoc user's group (to be created) and the licensing trustee;
          c. grant access to the Poseidon source code for NSPs' internal business only in
               exchange for a payment of a one off fee (twice the amount of the annual
               maintenance fee);
          d. externalise the governance of ZVT protocol to an independent not-for-profit
               industry organization, with a representation of all the market participants, with a
               right to sublicense the protocol to any and all interested parties, in exchange of a
               sublicense fee to be determined by the industry body;
          e. create a fast track dispute resolution system leading ultimately to arbitration
               before the International Chamber of Commerce.
V.1.2.   The results of the market test
         Merchant acquiring market in Belgium
(291) On the basis of the results of the market test the Commission considered that the Initial
      Commitments were overall viable and effective, subject to some limited improvements.
      The overwhelming part of the respondents to the market test indicated that the Initial
      Commitments cover the necessary assets, in particular the entire Paysquare customers
      portfolio, in order to enable a competitor to effectively run the business in a viable and
      profitable manner.134
(292) Some competitors indicated that the interim measures should be offered for duration of 24
      months instead of 18 months, as initially proposed by the Notifying Party, in order to
134     See replies to Questions 1 - 2 and 7 of Questionnaire R1 - Belgium.
                                                            45

      enable even a company which is currently not active in the market for merchant acquiring
      services in Belgium to establish its presence following the acquisition of the Divestment
      Business.135
      (293) The market participants also largely took the view that there is no need to enlarge
             the scope of the Initial Commitments and to include trademarks, service marks and
             brands, non-Belgian business, processing and product management as well as
             scheme and payment institution licenses.136
(294) Nevertheless, companies indicated that the duration of the non-compete obligation
      pursuant to which the Notifying Party is not allowed to target customers that form part of
      the divested portfolio should be longer than 3 years, in order to ensure the effectiveness of
      the Commitments.137
(295) As to the suitable purchasers for the acquisition of the Divestment Business, the market
      test revealed that the Divestment Business can be operated in an efficient manner even by
      a merchant acquirer with no current activity in Belgium.138
(296) Finally, respondents to the market test considered the Initial Commitments as sufficiently
      attractive and several companies expressed an interest in acquiring the Divested
      Business.139
          Provision of software for the activities of NSPs in Germany
(297) The results of the market test revealed the need for some important improvements of the
      Initial Commitments.
(298) While the majority of the respondents considered that the FRAND terms for Poseidon
      licenses proposed in the Initial Commitments were conceptually sufficient to remove the
      competition concern, namely preventing the Notifying Party from treating some of
      Poseidon customers worse than Paysquare,140 respondents to the market test identified
      several shortcomings, summarised below:141
           a. the commitment from the Notifying Party should entail a duty to provide FRAND
               treatment also if the performance of the software was increased;
           b. FRAND should apply to Poseidon updates and new modules which may be
               developed in the future;
           c. existing contracts with NSPs should, if customers wish so, remain unchanged;
135     See replies to Questions 3 – 4 of Questionnaire R1 - Belgium.
136     See replies to Question 6 of Questionnaire R1 – Belgium.
137     See replies to Questions 8 and 8.1 of Questionnaire R1 – Belgium.
138     See replies to Questions 9 – 10 of Questionnaire R1 – Belgium
139     See replies to Questions 11 - 14 of Questionnaire R1 – Belgium
140     See replies to Questions 1 and 13 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
141     See replies to Question 1 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
                                                           46

          d. the monitoring mechanism for FRAND conditions should be clarified;142
          e. the capping of the license fee should be offered for duration longer than 5 years;143
          f. there should be an effective sanction in case of breach of the FRAND conditions
               by the Notifying Party. Access to the source code subject to royalty payment was
               not considered as a sufficiently effective deterrent.144
(299) Second, the market test revealed a need for substantial improvement of the Initial
      Commitments regarding the access to the source code and the possibility for NSPs to
      develop an alternative solution.
(300) The overwhelming majority of the respondents pointed out that access to the source code
      should not be limited to the development of in-house solution only, because the
      development cost is substantial and the process relatively complex.145 In this respect a
      NSPs mentioned that: "Just to develop the Poseidon authorisation software with all its
      functionalities for internal purposes is so much time consuming and expensive to use it
      than only internally."146 The same NSP also pointed out that: "The development of an
      alternative solution to Poseidon Software should be allowed to several NSP customers
      that could develop the solution commonly and reduce costs of software development."147
(301) According to the results of the market test, the development of an alternative solution will
      take longer than 2 years, even if access to the source code and the ZVT protocol is
      provided. The market participants emphasised the need to extend all provisions of the
      Initial Commitments for a duration of 10 years.148
(302) NSPs also stressed the need to have technical assistance, if necessary for working with the
      source code. The Notifying Party should also provide maintenance services during the
      development and testing phase of an alternative solution developed by NSPs based on the
      source code.149
(303) Third, respondents to the market test took the view that the divestment of the ZVT
      protocol and unrestricted access to it are crucial elements for the development of an
      alternative to Poseidon.150 Nevertheless the development of competing software limited to
      in-house use would still not be commercially viable for NSPs. This was also stressed as
      the main implementation risk affecting the viability of the Commitments.151
142     See replies to Question 11 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
143     See replies to Question 2 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
144     See replies to Question 3 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
145     See replies to Questions 5 – 7 and 10 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
146     See replies to Question 7.1 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
147     See replies to Question 7.2 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
148     See replies to Question 5 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
149     See replies to Question 7.2 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
150     See replies to Question 8 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
151     See replies to Questions 9, 14, 14.1 and 15 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
                                                           47

(304) Finally, the participants to the market investigation emphasised that the organisation
      managing the ZVT protocol should be independent from the Notifying Party. 152
V.1.3.    The Final Commitments
(305) On 19 April 2016, the Notifying Party submitted the Final Commitments, in order to
      address the concerns raised on the basis of the market test. The Final Commitments
      follow the structure of the Initial Commitments and contain several improvements
      compared to those.
      Merchant acquiring market in Belgium
(306) The main improvements regarding the Divested Business in Belgium are: (i) the
      prolongation of the Interim Agreements for transaction processing, customer and acquirer
      servicing (such as call centre and fraud handling), continued technical product
      management, scheme licenses and payment institutions licenses from 18 to 24 months;
      and the extension of the duration of the non – compete obligation of the Notifying Party
      from 3 to 5 years.
      Provision of software for the activities of NSPs in Germany
(307) The Final Commitments contain substantial improvements as compared to the Initial
      Commitments. The Notifying Party implemented the essential suggestions made by the
      market participants in the course of the market test and presented above in section V.1.2.
(308) In particular, the scope the Commitments was extended in order to cover all Poseidon
      modules used by NSPs and their updates, as well as those modules of potential future
      software which performs in essence the same functions as Poseidon today.
(309) The monitoring mechanism of the FRAND terms was improved. The Licensing Trustee
      will be granted access to all licensing agreements between Worldline and its customers,153
      including in particular PaySquare, in order to carry out an initial and then a yearly
      benchmarking. In addition, any NSP will be able to submit its own terms and conditions
      to the Licensing Trustee at any time so as to identify the status of its treatment compared
      to the terms and conditions granted to PaySquare and be able to opt for the FRAND terms
      at its sole option should it be more favourable.
(310) In case of a material breach of the FRAND terms the Notifying Party commits to give
      access to the source code free of charge.
(311) The procedural rules and rights of the ad hoc users group have been clarified. The
      Notifying Party commits to take the recommendations of the user group into account and
      make the necessary steps to implement these recommendations to the extent it is
      reasonable, possible and feasible.
(312) Any NSP who has paid for a license as well as for the access to the Poseidon source code
      will be able to mutualize costs and develop together with any other NSP placed in the
      same situation, an alternative solution based on Poseidon, either internally or with a third
      party supplier of their choice.
152     See replies to Questions 14.1 of Questionnaire R2 – Germany
153     For customers other than Paysquare, this is subject to their agreement.
                                                            48

(313) If access to the Poseidon source code is requested, Worldline will continue to provide
      maintenance services to the NSP for the duration of the development phase of an
      alternative solution by the NSP.
(314) The governance of the ZVT protocol will be transferred to an independent not for profit
      organisation such as such as the German terminal manufacturer's organization named
      Verband der Terminalhersteller in Deutschland e.V.
VI.      ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPOSED REMEDIES
      Merchant acquiring market in Belgium
(315) As indicated above in section IV.4.1.2, the Transaction raises doubts as to its
      compatibility with the internal market due to non-coordinated horizontal effects on the
      market(s) for merchant acquiring in Belgium, and conglomerate foreclosure effects on the
      same market and the related market for the provision of POS terminals in Belgium.
(316) According to the Notifying Party, the commitment relating to Belgium removes the
      overlap on this market entirely, and as a result, the potential competition concerns arising
      as a result of the Transaction are eliminated.
(317) In light of the results of the market test, and the improvements of the Final Commitments
      as compared to the Initial Commitments, the Commission considers that the doubts as to
      the compatibility of the Transaction with the internal market are eliminated in relation to
      merchant acquiring in Belgium.
(318) First, practically all respondent to the market investigation took the view that the scope of
      the commitment encompasses all of Paysquare's merchant acquiring business in
      Belgium.154 In that context, it is important to note that the Notifying Party confirmed that
      only one of Paysquare's contracts with merchants requires their consent to be transferred.
(319) Moreover, the extension of the non-compete clause for Paysquare's current customers,
      which will be transferred to the purchaser, enhances in the Commission's view the
      structural effect of the commitment.
(320) Second, in light of the result of the market test, the Commission considers that no
      additional assets or personnel are needed in order to make the divested business viable, so
      that it can be run by the purchaser in a profitable manner on a lasting basis.155
(321) Third, the main implementation risk revealed by the market test, consisting in the need for
      a smooth transition of the merchant acquiring contracts to the purchaser, was, in the
      Commission's view, considerable reduced through the prolongation of the Interim Service
      Arrangements to 24 month.
(322) Fourth, the Commission considers the fact that all but one respondent to the market test
      find the divested business attractive, and almost all that are active in merchant acquiring
154     See replies to Question 1 of Questionnaire R1 – Belgium
155     See replies to Questions 2, 6 and 7 of Questionnaire R1 – Belgium
                                                            49

      would be interested in buying it, a strong indication for the viability of the of the
      Divestment Business.156
(323) In light of the above, the Commission concludes that the Final Commitments are
      sufficient to eliminate all serious doubts identified in the competition analysis as regards
      merchant acquiring (and the provision of POS terminals) in Belgium.
      Provision of software for the activities of NSPs in Germany
(324) As indicated above in section IV.4.6, the Transaction raises doubts as to its compatibility
      with the internal market due to vertical foreclosure effects on the market for the provision
      of software for the activities of NSPs in Germany.
(325) According to the Notifying Party, the commitment relating to Germany eliminates the
      potential competition concerns arising as a result of the Transaction.
(326) In light of the results of the market test confirm, and the improvements of the Final
      Commitments as compared to the Initial Commitment, the Commission considers that this
      is the case.
(327) At the outset, the Commission notes that the commitments relating to Germany consist of
      two main elements: FRAND licences for the Poseidon software (and potential
      successors), and, as a safeguard, a number of provisions that are meant to facilitate the
      development of an alternative to Poseidon.
(328) As regards the commitment to grant licences at FRAND terms, the Commission considers
      that the results of the market test, and the improvements notably relating to the duration
      and the monitoring thereof, provide a sufficient level of certainty as to their effectiveness.
      A clear majority of respondents to the market test indicate that this part of the
      commitments will prevent any discrimination amongst Poseidon customers.157
(329) Furthermore, the implementation risk revealed by the market test, namely that even with
      access to source code and ZVT protocol, it would be too costly for a single NSP to
      develop an alternative to Poseidon for in-house use has been considerably reduced by the
      improvement of the Final Commitments as compared to the Initial Commitments in this
      regard. The fact that the commitments now enable NSPs to pool resources and jointly
      develop an alternative will in the Commission's view considerably increase cost-
      effectiveness and thereby the possibility of such a development occurring.
(330) In addition, this will enhance the deterrent effect of this aspect of the Final Commitments,
      in so far as discrimination of Poseidon customers might motivate them to the
      development of an alternative quickly, which as a result of the Final Commitments would
      now seem to be an affordable course of action.
(331) In combination with the other elements of the commitments relating to Germany, such as
      the free access to the Poseidon source in the event of a material breach of the
      commitments by Worldline, the Commission considers that the entire set of provisions
156     See replies to Questions 12, 13 and 14 of Questionnaire R1 – Belgium
157     See replies to Questions 1and 13 of Questionnaire R2– Germany
                                                          50

      will remove both the ability and in particular the incentive for Worldline to (partially)
      foreclose NSP competitors.
(332) In light of the above, the Commission concludes that the Final Commitments are
      sufficient to eliminate all serious doubts identified in the competition analysis as regards
      the market for the provision of software for the activities of NSPs in Germany
Conclusion
(333) For the reasons outlined above and in view of the results of the market test and the
      ensuing improvements to the Initials Commitments, the Commission considers the Final
      Commitments to be sufficient in scope and suitable to eliminate the serious doubts as to
      the compatibility of the Transaction with the internal market in relation to provision of
      merchant acquiring services in Belgium and the provision of software for the activities of
      NSPs in Germany.
(334) The Final Commitments in sections I and II (including Schedules I and II, and
      Appendixes I and II thereto) of the Annex constitute conditions attached to this decision,
      as only through full compliance therewith can the structural changes in the relevant
      markets be achieved.
(335) The achievement of the measure that gives rise to the structural change of the market is a
      condition, whereas the implementing steps which are necessary to achieve this result are
      generally obligations on the Notifying Party. Where a condition is not fulfilled, the
      Commission's decision declaring the concentration compatible with the internal market no
      longer stands. Where the undertakings concerned commit a breach of an obligation, the
      Commission may revoke the clearance decision in accordance with Article 8(6) of the
      Merger Regulation. The undertakings concerned may also be subject to fines and periodic
      penalty payments under Articles 14(2) and 15(1) of the Merger Regulation.
(336) The Decision in this case is conditioned on the full compliance with the requirements set
      out in sections I and II (including Schedules I and II, and Appendixes I and II thereto) of
      the Final Commitments (conditions), while all other Sections should be obligations within
      the meaning of Article 8(2) of the Merger Regulation. The full text of the Final
      Commitments is attached as an Annex to this Decision and forms an integral part thereof.
VII.     CONCLUSION
(337) For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
      as modified by the commitments and to declare it compatible with the internal market and
      with the functioning of the EEA Agreement, subject to full compliance with the
      conditions in sections I and II of the commitments annexed to the present decision and
      with the obligations contained in the other sections of the said commitments. This
      decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) in conjunction with Article 6(2) of the
      Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                       For the Commission
                                                       (Signed)
                                                       Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                       Member of the Commission
                                                    51

CASE COMP M.7873- Worldline / Equens /
            PaySquare
   COMMITMENTS OFFERED BY
  WORLDLINE TO THE EUROPEAN
         COMMISSION
          18 APRIL 2016

EUROPEAN COMMISSION
Directorate General for Competition
Place Madou 1 / Madou Plein 1
1210 Saint-Josse-ten-Noode
Brussels
                  Case COMP M.7873- Worldline / Equens / PaySquare
Object: Commitment package offered by Worldline to the European Commission in
relation to merchant acquiring market in Belgium and to the Poseidon software
solution in Germany
Pursuant to Article 6(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the "Merger
Regulation"), Worldline (the "Notifying Party") hereby enters into the following
Commitments (the "Commitments") vis-a-vis the European Commission (the
"Commission") with a view to rendering the acquisition of sole control of the whole of
Equens S.E. ("Equens"), including its subsidiary PaySquare (the "Concentration")
compatible with the internal market and the functioning of the EEA Agreement by its
decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation (the "Decision").
The Commitments shall take effect upon the date of adoption of the Decision.
This text shall be interpreted in light of the Decision, in the general framework of
European Union law, in particular in light of the Merger Regulation, and by reference to
the Commission Notice on remedies acceptable under Council Regulation (EC) No
139/2004     and      under     Commission        Regulation     (EC)    No     802/2004.
                                                2

 Section A.     Definitions
1.  For the purpose of the Commitments, the following terms shall have the following
    meaning:
        <U+F0B7>   Affiliated Undertakings: undertakings controlled by the Parties and/or by the
            ultimate parents of the Parties, whereby the notion of control shall be interpreted
            pursuant to Article 3 of the Merger Regulation and in light of the Commission
            Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice under Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
            on the control of concentrations between undertakings.
        <U+F0B7>   Assets: the assets that contribute to the current operation or are necessary to
            ensure the viability and competitiveness of the Divestment Business as indicated
            and described more in detail in Schedule 1.
        <U+F0B7>   Closing: the transfer of the legal title to the Divestment Business to the
            Purchaser.
        <U+F0B7>   Closing Date: the closing of the proposed transaction filed under case M.7873.
        <U+F0B7>   Closing Period: the period of […] from the approval of the Purchaser and the
            terms of sale by the Commission.
        <U+F0B7>   Confidential Information: any business secrets, know-how, commercial
            information, or any other information of a proprietary nature that is not in the
            public domain.
        <U+F0B7>   Conflict of Interest: any conflict of interest that impairs the Trustee's
            objectivity and independence in discharging its duties under the Commitments.
        <U+F0B7>   Divestment Business: PaySquare's client portfolio, key assets and key personnel
            as defined and detailed in Schedule 1 which Worldline commits to divest.
        <U+F0B7>   Divestiture Trustee: one or more natural or legal person(s) who is/are approved
            by the Commission and appointed by Worldline and who has/have received from
            Worldline the exclusive Trustee Mandate to sell the Divestment Business to a
            Purchaser at no minimum price at the expiry of the first Divestiture Period
        <U+F0B7>   Effective Date: the date of adoption of the Decision.
        <U+F0B7>   Equens: a Societas Europaea incorporated under the laws of the Netherlands
            (Europese vennootschap), with its official seat in Utrecht, the Netherlands, and
            its registered office at Eendrachtlaan 315, (3526 LB) Utrecht, the Netherlands,
            registered with the Dutch Trade Register of the Chamber of Commerce under
            number 30220519.
        <U+F0B7>   First Divestiture Period: a period of […] as from the Effective Date.
        <U+F0B7>   Hold Separate Manager: the person appointed by Worldline for the
                                                  3

       Divestment Business to manage the day-to-day business under the supervision of
       the Monitoring Trustee.
   <U+F0B7>   Licensing Trustee: one or more natural or legal person(s) who is/are approved
       by the Commission and appointed by Worldline, and who has/have the duty to
       monitor Worldline's compliance with its obligations under Section II.
   <U+F0B7>   Monitoring Trustee: one or more natural or legal person(s) who is/are approved
       by the Commission and appointed by Worldline, and who has/have the duty to
       monitor Worldline's compliance with the conditions and obligations attached to
       the Decision.
   <U+F0B7>   Network Service Providers or NSPs: the Network Service Providers
       (Netzbetreiber) active at the Effective Date, the list of which is published by Die
       Deutsche                                                                  Kreditwirtschafe
   <U+F0B7>   1 (DK).
   <U+F0B7>   Parties: Worldline and the target of the concentration.
   <U+F0B7>   PaySquare: PaySquare, incorporated under the laws of the Netherlands, having
       its official seat in Utrecht, the Netherlands and its registered office at
       Eendrachtlaan 315, (3526 LB) Utrecht, the Netherlands and registered with the
       Dutch Trade Register of the Chamber of Commerce under number 30196418.
   <U+F0B7>   Personnel or Key Personnel: active sales and account managers in charge of
       the Divestment Business namely 2 FTE key account managers and 1 FTE for
       Telesales are currently working on the Divestment Business and may be part of
       the Divestment Business at the option of the Purchaser.
   <U+F0B7>   Poseidon: the application software developed and owned by Worldline which is
       licensed to most Network Service Providers allowing them to ensure several
       functionalities linked to the processing of card transaction (routing, clearing,
       authorization of credit-, fleet-and private label cards, support of the DK
       requirements like girocard and girogo, ZVT communication protocol, "on us"
       authorization for ELV and some terminal management functions).
   <U+F0B7>   Purchaser: the entity approved by the Commission as acquirer of the
       Divestment Business in accordance with the criteria set out in Section I.C.
   <U+F0B7>   Purchaser Criteria: the criteria laid down in paragraph 21of these
       Commitments that the Purchaser must fulfil in order to be approved by the
       Commission.
1 See: http:/fwww.die-deutsche-kreditwirtschaft.de/dk/zahlungsverkehrfzulassungsverfahrenfelectronic-
  cash-system.html
                                                   4

<U+F0B7> Schedule: the schedule to these Commitments describing more in detail the
  Divestment Business and the term sheet license agreement under FRAND terms
  proposed by Worldline.
<U+F0B7> Trustee(s): the Monitoring Trustee and/or the Divestiture Trustee and/or the
  Licensing Trustee as the case may be.
<U+F0B7> Trustee Divestiture Period: the period of […] from the end of the First
  Divestiture Period.
<U+F0B7> Poseidon ZVT Protocol or ZVT: the protocol developed and owned by
  Worldline which is currently licensed to NSPs and terminal manufacturers. ZVT
  is the communication protocol used to enable communication between the
  payment terminals also using ZVT and Poseidon. ZVT is currently licensed to
  terminal manufacturers as well as NSPs using the Poseidon software application
  and NSPs who use their own proprietary solutions.
                                      5

I.       PAYSQUARE CLIENTS PORTFOLIO IN MERCHANT ACQUIRING IN
BELGIUM
Section I.A.     The    commitment        to    divest   and  the    Divestment     Business
       Commitment to divest
2. In order to maintain effective competition, Worldline commits to divest, or procure the
   divestiture of the Divestment Business by the end of the Trustee Divestiture Period as a
   going concern to a purchaser and on terms of sale approved by the Commission in
   accordance with the procedure described in these Commitments. To carry out the
   divestiture, Worldline commits to find a purchaser and to enter into a final binding sale
   and purchase agreement for the sale of the Divestment Business within the First
   Divestiture Period. If Worldline has not entered into such an agreement at the end of the
   First Divestiture Period, Worldline shall grant the Divestiture Trustee an exclusive
   mandate to sell the Divestment Business in accordance with the procedure described in
   paragraphs 35 and following.
3. Worldline shall be deemed to have complied with this commitment if:
        a) by the end of the Trustee Divestiture Period, Worldline or the Divestiture
           Trustee has entered into a final binding sale and purchase agreement and the
           Commission approves the proposed purchaser and the terms of sale as being
           consistent with the Commitments in accordance with the procedure described;
           and
        b) the Closing of the sale of the Divestment Business to the Purchaser takes place
           within the Closing Period.
4.  In order to reinforce the structural effect of the Commitments, Worldline undertakes to
    terminate, in compliance with legal requirements and the contractual terms, the
    customer contracts remaining in the scope of the Divestment Business at the expiry of
    the Trustee Divestiture Period if any. Worldline undertakes to notify this termination
    in accordance with the contractual provisions and will invite the customers to find an
    alternative merchant acquirer.
5.  With regards to customer contracts requiring the customer's consent to be transferred
    to a third party, Worldline will endeavour its best efforts to procure the customer's
    consent. Should this consent not be obtained within 2 months following the signing of
    the purchase agreement, Worldline undertakes to immediately notice the customer of
    the termination of the contract.
6.  In order to maintain the structural effect of the Commitments, Worldline shall, for a
                                                    6

    period of 5 years after Closing, neither directly approach nor directly contract with the
    customers of the Divestment Business, unless following the submission of a reasoned
    request from Worldline showing good cause and accompanied by a report from the
    Monitoring Trustee, the Commission finds that the structure of the market has changed
    to such an extent that the absence of influence over the Divestment Business is no
    longer necessary to render the proposed concentration compatible with the internal
    market.
7.  In addition, Worldline commits to duly inform in writing its indirect sales channels
    partners in Belgium no later than Closing that it will not be able to contract with
    customers that are part of the Divestment Business for a period of 5 years as from the
    Closing.
       Structure and definition of the Divestment Business
8.  The Divestment Business consists of PaySquare's merchant acquiring business in
    Belgium, as detailed in Schedule 1. The legal and functional structure of the
    Divestment Business as operated to date is d escribed in Schedule 1. The Divestment
    Business as detailed in Schedule 1 includes all the commercial assets and related staff
    at the option of the purchaser that contribute to the current operation or are necessary
    to ensure the viability and competitiveness of the Divestment Business.
9.  In addition, the Divestment Business includes the benefit, for a transitional period of
    up to24 months after Closing and on terms and conditions equivalent to those at
    present afforded to the Divestment Business, of all current license and processing
    arrangements under which PaySquare supply products or services to the Divestment
    Business, as detailed in Schedule 1, unless otherwise agreed with the Purchaser. Strict
    Chinese wall procedures will be adopted as required so as to ensure that a ny
    competitively sensitive information related to, or a rising from such supply
    arrangements (for example, product roadmaps) will not be shared with, or passed on
    to, anyone else.
Section I.B       Related commitments
       Preservation of viability. marketability and competitiveness
10.   From the Effective Date until Closing, Worldline shall preserve or procure the
      preservation of the economic viability, marketability and competitiveness of the
      Divestment Business, in accordance with good business practice, and shall minimise
                                                  7

    as far as possible any risk of loss of competitive potential of the Divestment Business.
11. In particular Worldline undertakes:
        a) not to carry out any action that might have a significant adverse impact on the
            value, management or competitiveness of the Divestment Business or that
            might alter the nature and scope of activity, or the industrial or commercial
            strategy or the investment policy of the Divestment Business;
        b) to make available, or procure to make available, sufficient resources for the
            development of the Divestment Business, on the basis and continuation of the
            existing business plans;
        c) to take all reasonable steps, or procure that all reasonable steps are being
            taken, including appropriate incentive schemes (based on industry practice), to
            encourage all Key Personnel to remain with the Divestment Business, and not
            to solicit or move any Personnel to Worldline's remaining business. Where,
            nevertheless, individual members of the Key Personnel exceptionally l eave
            the Divestment Business, Worldline shall provide a reasoned proposal to
            replace the person or persons concerned to the Commission and the
            Monitoring Trustee. Worldline must be able to demonstrate to the
            Commission that the replacement is well suited to carry out the functions
            exercised by those individual members of the Key Personnel. The replacement
            shall take place under the supervision of the Monitoring Trustee, who shall
            report to the Commission.
      Hold-separate obligations
12. Worldline commits, from the Effective Date until Closing, to keep the Divestment
    Business separate from the business(es) it is retaining and to ensure that unless
    explicitly permitted under these Commitments: (i) current Worldline management
    and staff have no involvement in the Divestment business; (ii) the Key Personnel and
    Personnel of the Divestment Business have no involvement in any business retained
    by Worldline and do not report to any individual outside the Divestment Business.
13. Immediately after the adoption of the Decision, Worldline shall appoint a Hold
    Separate Manager. The Hold Separate Manager, who shall be part of the Key
    Personnel, shall manage the Divestment Business independently and in the best
    interest of the business with a view to ensuring its continued economic viability,
    marketability and competitiveness and its independence from the businesses retained
    by Worldline.
14. The Hold Separate Manager shall closely cooperate with and report to the Monitoring
    Trustee and, if applicable, the Divestiture Trustee. Any replacement of the Hold
                                                8

    Separate Manager shall be subject to the procedure laid down in paragraph 11(c) of
    these Commitments. The Commission may, after having heard Worldline, require
    Worldline to replace the Hold Separate Manager.
15. Until Closing, Worldline shall assist the Monitoring Trustee in ensuring that the
    Divestment Business is managed as a distinct and saleable entity separate from the
    business(es) which Worldline is retaining.
      Ring-fencing
16. Worldline shall implement, or procure to implement, all necessary measures to
    ensure that it does not, after the Effective Date, obtain any Confidential Information
    relating to the Divestment Business and that any such Confidential Information
    obtained by Worldline before the Effective Date will be eliminated and not be used
    by Worldline. In particular, the participation of the Divestment Business in any
    central information technology network shall be severed to the extent possible,
    without compromising the viability of the Divestment Business. Worldline may
    obtain or keep information relating to the Divestment Business which is reasonably
    necessary for the divestiture of the Divestment Business or the disclosure of which to
    Worldline is required by law.
      Non-solicitation clause
17. The Parties undertake, subject to customary limitations, not to solicit, and to procure
    that Affiliated Undertakings do not solicit, the Key Personnel transferred with the
    Divestment Business for a period of 2 years after Closing.
      Due diligence
18. In order to enable potential purchasers to carry out a reasonable due diligence of the
    Divestment Business, Worldline shall, subject to customary confidentiality
    assurances and dependent on the stage of the divestiture process:
        a) provide to potential purchasers sufficient information as regards the
            Divestment Business;
        b) provide to potential purchasers sufficient information relating to the Key
            Personnel and allow them reasonable access to the Key Personnel. Reporting
19. Worldline shall submit written reports in English on potential purchasers of the
    Divestment Business and developments in the negotiations with such potential
    purchasers to the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee no later than 10 days after
    the end of every month following the Effective Date (or otherwise at the
                                                 9

      Commission's request). Worldline shall submit a list of all potential purchasers
      having expressed interest in acquiring the Divestment Business to the Commission at
      each and every stage of the divestiture process, as well as a copy of all the offers
      made by potential purchasers within five days of their receipt.
20.   Worldline shall inform the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee on the
      preparation of the data room documentation and the due diligence procedure and shall
      submit a copy of any information memorandum to the Commission if any and the
      Monitoring Trustee before sending the memorandum out to potential purchasers.
Section I.C.       The Purchaser
21.   In order to be approved by the Commission, the Purchaser must fulfil the following
      criteria:
          a) The Purchaser shall be independent of and unconnected to Worldline and its
               Affiliated Undertakings (this being assessed having regard to the situation
               following the divestiture).
           b) The Purchaser shall have the financial resources, proven expertise and
                incentive to maintain and develop the Divestment Business as a viable and
                active competitive force in competition with the Parties and other
                competitors;
           c) The acquisition of the Divestment Business by the Purchaser must neither be
                likely to create, in light of the information available to the Commission, prima
                facie competition concerns nor give rise to a risk that the implementation of
                the Commitments will be delayed. In particular, the Purchaser must
                reasonably be expected to have or obtain all necessary licenses and approvals
                from the relevant regulatory authorities for the acquisition of the Divestment
                Business.
22.   The final binding sale and purchase agreement (as well as ancillary agreements)
      relating to the divestment of the Divestment Business shall be conditional on the
      Commission's approval. When Worldline has reached an agreement with a purchaser,
      it shall submit a fully documented and reasoned proposal, including a copy of the
      final agreement(s), within one week to the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee.
      Worldline must be able to demonstrate to the Commission that the purchaser fulfils
      the Purchaser Criteria and that the Divestment Business is being sold in a manner
      consistent with the Commission's Decision and the Commitments.
                                                      10

23.   For the approval, the Commission shall verify that the purchaser fulfils the Purchaser
      Criteria and that the Divestment Business is being sold in a manner consistent with
      the Commitments including their objective to bring about a lasting structural change
      in the market. The Commission may approve the sale of the Divestment Business
      without one or more Assets or parts of the Personnel, or by substituting one or more
      Assets or parts of the Personnel with one or more different assets or different
      personnel, if this does not affect the viability and competitiveness of the Divestment
      Business after the sale, taking account of the proposed purchaser.
Section I.D.     Trustee
        I.      Appointment procedure
24.   Worldline shall appoint a Monitoring Trustee to carry out the functions specified in
      these Commitments for a Monitoring Trustee. Worldline commits not to close the
      Concentration before the appointment of a Monitoring Trustee.
25.   If Worldline has not entered into a binding sale and purchase agreement regarding the
      Divestment Business one month before the end of the First Divestiture Period or if
      the Commission has rejected a purchaser proposed by Worldline at that time or
      thereafter, Worldline shall appoint a Divestiture Trustee. The appointment of the
      Divestiture Trustee shall take effect upon the commencement of the Trustee
      Divestiture Period.
26.   The Trustee shall:
           a) at the time of appointment, be independent of Worldline and its/their
              Affiliated Undertakings;
           b) possess the necessary qualifications to carry out its mandate, for example
              have sufficient relevant experience as an investment banker or consultant or
              auditor; and
           c) neither have nor become exposed to a Conflict of Interest.
27.   The Trustee shall be remunerated by Worldline in a way that does not impede the
      independent and effective fulfilment of its mandate. In particular, where the
      remuneration package of a Divestiture Trustee includes a success premium linked to
      the final sale value of the Divestment Business, such success premium may only be
      earned if the divestiture takes place within the Trustee Divestiture Period.
                 Proposal by Worldline
28.   No later than 10 working days after the Effective Date, Worldline shall submit the
                                                  11

    name or names of one or more natural or legal persons whom Worldline proposes to
    appoint as the Monitoring Trustee to the Commission for approval. No later than one
    month before the end of the First Divestiture Period or on request by the Commission,
    Worldline shall submit a list of one or more persons whom Worldline proposes to
    appoint as Divestiture Trustee to the Commission for approval. The proposal shall
    contain sufficient information for the Commission to verify that the person or persons
    proposed as Trustee fulfil the requirements set out in paragraph 26 and shall include:
        a) the full terms of the proposed mandate, which shall include all provisions
             necessary to enable the Trustee to fulfil its duties under these Commitments;
        b) the outline of a work plan which describes how the Trustee intends to carry
             out its assigned tasks;
        c) an indication whether the proposed Trustee is to act as both Monitoring
             Trustee and Divestiture Trustee or whether different trustees are proposed for
             the two functions.
                Approval or rejection by the Commission
29. The Commission shall have the discretion to approve or reject the proposed
    Trustee(s) and to approve the proposed mandate subject to any modifications it deems
    necessary for the Trustee to fulfil its obligations. If only one name is approved,
    Worldline shall appoint or ca use to be appointed the person or persons concerned as
    Trustee, in accordance with the mandate approved by the Commission. If more than
    one name is approved, Worldline shall be free to choose the Trustee to be appointed
    from a mong the names approved. The Trustee shall be appointed within one week of
    the Commission's approval, in accordance with the mandate approved by the
    Commission.
                New proposal by the Worldline
30. If all the proposed Trustees are rejected, Worldline shall submit the names of at least
    two more natural or legal persons within one week of being informed of the rejection,
    in accordance with paragraphs 24 to 29 of these Commitments.
                 Trustee nominated by the Commission
31. If all further proposed Trustees are rejected by the Commission, the Commission
    shall nominate a Trustee, whom Worldline shall appoint, or cause to be appointed, in
    accordance with a trustee mandate approved by the Commission.
                                                 12

      II.      Functions of the Trustee
32. The Trustee shall assume its specified duties and obligations in order to ensure
    compliance with the Commitments. The Commission may, on its own initiative or at
    the request of the Trustee or Worldline, give any orders or instructions to the Trustee
    in order to ensure compliance with the conditions and obligations attached to the
    Decision.
               Duties and obligations of the Monitoring Trustee
33. The Monitoring Trustee shall:
       i.  propose in its first report to the Commission a detail ed work plan describing
           how it intends to monitor compliance with the obligations and conditions
           attached to the Decision.
      ii.  oversee, in close co-operation with the Hold Separate Manager, the on-going
           management of the Divestment Business with a view to ensuring its continued
           economic       viability, marketability   and   competitiveness   and   monitor
           compliance by Worldline with the conditions and obligations attached to the
           Decision. To that end the Monitoring Trustee shall:
               a) monitor the preservation of the economic viability, marketability and
                    competitiveness of the Divestment Business, and the keeping separate
                    of the Divestment Business from the business retained by the Parties,
                    in accordance with paragraphs 10 and 12 of these Commitments;
               b) supervise the management of the Divestment Business as a distinct
                    and saleable entity, in accordance with paragraph 13 of these
                    Commitments;
               c) with respect to Confidential Information:
                 <U+F02D> determine all necessary measures to ensure that Worldline does not
                      after the Effective Date obtain any Confidential Information relating
                      to the Divestment Business,
                 <U+F02D> in particular strive for the severing of the Divestment Business'
                      participation in a central information technology network to the
                      extent possible, without compromising the viability of the
                      Divestment Business,
                 <U+F02D> make sure that any Confidential Information relating to the
                      Divestment Business obtained by Worldline before the Effective
                      Date is eliminated and will not be used by Worldline and
                                                13

            <U+F02D> decide whether such information may be disclosed to or kept by
                Worldline as the disclosure is reasonably necessary to allow
                Worldline to carry out the divestiture or as the disclosure is required
                by law;
          d) monitor the splitting of assets and the allocation of Personnel between
              the Divestment Business and Worldline or Affiliated Undertakings;
 iii. propose to Worldline such measures as the Monitoring Trustee considers
      necessary to ensure Worldline's compliance with the conditions and
      obligations attached to the Decision, in particular the maintenance of the full
      economic viability, marketability or competitiveness of the Divestment
      Business, the holding separate of the Divestment Business and the non-
      disclosure of competitively sensitive information;
  iv. review and assess potential purchasers as well as the progress of the
      divestiture process and verify that, dependent on the stage of the divestiture
      process:
          a) potential purchasers receive sufficient and correct information relating
              to the Divestment Business and the Personnel in particular by
              reviewing, if available, the data room documentation, the information
              memorandum and the due diligence process, and
          b) potential purchasers are granted reasonable access to the Personnel;
   v. act as a contact point for any requests by third parties, in particular potential
      purchasers, in relation to the Commitments;
  vi. provide to the Commission, sending Worldline a non-confidential copy at the
      same time, a written report within 15 days after the end of every month that
      shall cover the operation and management of the Divestment Business as well
      as the splitting of assets and the allocation of Personnel so that the
      Commission can assess whether the business is held in a manner consistent
      with the Commitments and the progress of the divestiture process as well as
      potential purchasers;
 vii. promptly report in writing to the Commission, sending Worldline a non-
      confidential copy at the same time, if it concludes on reasonable grounds that
      Worldline is failing to comply with these Commitments;
viii. within one (1) week after receipt of the documented proposal referred to in
      paragraph 22 of these Commitments, submit to the Commission, sending
      Worldline a non-confidential copy at the same time, a reasoned opinion as to
      the suitability and independence of the proposed purchaser and the viability of
                                          14

            the Divestment Business after the Sale and as to whether the Divestment
            Business is sold in a manner consistent with the conditions and obligations
            attached to the Decision, in particular, if relevant, whether the Sale of the
            Divestment Business without one or more Assets or not all of the Personnel
            affects the viability of the Divestment Business after the sale, taking account
            of the proposed purchaser;
     ix.    assume the other functions assigned to the Monitoring Trustee under the
            conditions and obligations attached to the Decision.
34. If the Monitoring and Divestiture Trustee are not the same legal or natural persons,
    the Monitoring Trustee and the Divestiture Trustee shall cooperate closely with each
    other during and for the purpose of the preparation of the Trustee Divestiture Period
    in order to facilitate each other's tasks.
                Duties and obligations of the Divestiture Trustee
35. Within the Trustee Divestiture Period, the Divestiture Trustee shall sell at no
    minimum price the Divestment Business to a purchaser, provided that the
    Commission has approved both the purchaser and the final binding sale and purchase
    agreement (and ancillary agreements) as in line with the Commission's Decision and
    the Commitments. The Divestiture Trustee shall include in the sale and purchase
    agreement (as well as in any ancillary agreements) such terms and conditions as it
    considers appropriate for an expedient sale in the Trustee Divestiture Period. In
    particular, the Divestiture Trustee may include in the sale and purchase agreement
    such customary representations and warranties and indemnities as are reasonably
    required to effect the sale. The Divestiture Trustee shall protect the legitimate
    financial interests of Worldline, subject to Worldline unconditional obligation to
    divest at no minimum price in the Trustee Divestiture Period.
36. In the Trustee Divestiture Period (or otherwise at the Commission's request), the
    Divestiture Trustee shall provide the Commission with a comprehensive monthly
    report written in English on the progress of the divestiture process. Such reports shall
    be submitted within 15 working days after the end of every month with a
    simultaneous copy to the Monitoring Trustee and a non-confidential copy to
    Worldline.
      III.      Duties and obligations of the Parties
37. Worldline shall provide and shall cause its advisors to provide the Trustee with all
                                                15

    such co-operation, assistance and information as the Trustee may reasonably require
    to perform its tasks. The Trustee shall have full and complete access to any of
    Worldline's or the Divestment Business' books, records, documents, management or
    other personnel, facilities, sites and technical information necessary for fulfilling its
    duties under the Commitments and Worldline and the Divestment Business shall
    provide the Trustee upon request with copies of any document. Worldline and the
    Divestment Business shall make available to the Trustee one or more offices on their
    premises and shall be available for meetings in order to provide the Trustee with all
    information necessary for the performance of its tasks.
38. Worldline shall provide the Monitoring Trustee with all managerial and
    administrative support that it may reasonably request on behalf of the management of
    the Divestment Business. This shall include all administrative support functions
    relating to the Divestment Business which are currently carried out at headquarters
    level. Worldline shall provide and shall cause its advisors to provide the Monitoring
    Trustee, on request, with the information submitted to potential purchasers, in
    particular give the Monitoring Trustee access to the data room documentation and all
    other information granted to potential purchasers in the due diligence procedure.
    Worldline shall inform the Monitoring Trustee on possible purchasers, submit lists of
    potential purchasers at each stage of the selection process, including the offers made
    by potential purchasers at those stages, and keep the Monitoring Trustee informed of
    all developments in the divestiture process.
39. Worldline shall grant or procure Affiliated Undertakings to grant comprehensive
    powers of attorney, duly executed, to the Divestiture Trustee to effect the sale
    (including ancillary agreements), the Closing and all actions and declarations which
    the Divestiture Trustee considers necessary or appropriate to achieve the sale and the
    Closing, including the appointment of advisors to assist with the sale process. Upon
    request of the Divestiture Trustee, Worldline shall cause the documents required for
    effecting the sale and the Closing to be duly executed.
40. Worldline shall indemnify the Trustee and its employees and agents (each an "
    Indemnified Party") and hold each Indemnified Party harmless against, and hereby
    agrees that an Indemnified Party shall have no liability to Worldline for, any
    liabilities arising out of the performance of the Trustee's duties under the
    Commitments, except to the extent that such liabilities result from the wilful default,
    recklessness, gross negligence or bad faith of the Trustee, its employees, agents or
    advisors.
41. At the expense of Worldline, the Trustee may appoint advisors (in particular for
                                                16

    corporate finance or legal advice), subject to Worldline's approval (this approval not
    to be unreasonably withheld or delayed) if the Trustee considers the appointment of
    such advisors necessary or appropriate for the performance of its duties and
    obligations under the Mandate, provided that any fees and other expenses incurred by
    the Trustee are reasonable. Should Worldline refuse to approve the advisors proposed
    by the Trustee the Commission may approve the appointment of such advisors
    instead, after having heard Worldline. Only the Trustee shall be entitled to issue
    instructions to the advisors. Paragraph 40 of these Commitments shall apply mutatis
    mutandis. In the Trustee Divestiture Period, the Divestiture Trustee may use advisors
    who served Worldline during the Divestiture Period if the Divestiture Trustee
    considers this in the best interest of an expedient sale.
42. Worldline agrees that the Commission may share Confidential Information
    proprietary to Worldline with the Trustee. The Trustee shall not disclose such
    information and the principles contained in Article 17 (1) and (2) of the Merger
    Regulation apply mutatis mutandis.
43. Worldline agrees that the contact details of the Monitoring Trustee are published on
    the website of the Commission's Directorate-General for Competition and they shall
    inform interested third parties, in particular any potential purchasers, of the identity
    and the tasks of the Monitoring Trustee.
44. For a period of 10 years from the Effective Date the Commission may request all
    information from the Parties that is reasonably necessary to monitor the effective
    implementation of these Commitments.
                                                 17

      IV.       Replacement. discharge and reappointment of the Trustee
45.   If the Trustee ceases to perform its functions under the Commitments or for any other
      good cause, including the exposure of the Trustee to a Conflict of Interest:
           a) the Commission may, after hearing the Trustee and Worldline, require
              Worldline to replace the Trustee; or
           b) Worldline may, with the prior approval of the Commission, replace the
              Trustee.
46.   If the Trustee is removed according to paragraph 45 of these Commitments, the
      Trustee may be required to continue in its function until a new Trustee is in place to
      whom the Trustee has effected a full hand over of all relevant information. The new
      Trustee shall be appointed in accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraphs
      24 to 31of these Commitments.
47.   Unless removed according to paragraph 45 of these Commitments, the Trustee shall
      cease to act as Trustee only after the Commission has discharged it from its duties
      after all the Commitments with which the Trustee has been entrusted have been
      implemented. However, the Commission may at any time require the reappointment
      of the Monitoring Trustee if it subsequently appears that the relevant remedies might
      not have been fully and properly implemented.
Section I.E.      The review clause
48.   The Commission may extend the time periods foreseen in the Commitments in
      response to a request from Worldline or, in appropriate cases, on its own initiative.
      Where Worldline requests an extension of a time period, it shall submit a reasoned
      request to the Commission no later than one month before the expiry of that period,
      showing good cause. This request shall be accompanied by a report from the
      Monitoring Trustee, who shall, at the same time send a non-confidential copy of the
      report to Worldline. Only in exceptional circumstances shall Worldline be entitled to
      request an extension within the last month of any period.
49.   The Commission may further, in response to a reasoned request from the Notifying
      Parties showing good cause waive, modify or substitute, in exceptional
      circumstances, one or more of the undertakings in these Commitments. This request
      shall be accompanied by a report from the Monitoring Trustee, who shall, at the same
      time send a non-confidential copy of the report to Worldline. The request shall not
                                                  18

      have the effect of suspending the application of the undertaking and, in particular, of
      suspending the expiry of any time period in which the undertaking has to be complied
      with.
II. GERMANY
Section II.A. Purpose
50.   Worldline understands that a number of German Network Service Providers ("NSPs")
      have apparently questioned Worldline's willingness, following the closing of the
      Concentration, to continue entering into Poseidon licensing agreements with NSPs
      under fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory terms.
51.   Worldline started to develop software solutions for NSPs in 1989 in response to their
      needs. Since then, Worldline has developed and upgraded such software solutions
      which became Poseidon. ZVT is the communication protocol used to enable
      communication between the payment terminals also using ZVT and Poseidon. ZVT is
      today licensed to terminal manufacturers as well as NSPs using the Poseidon software
      application and NSPs who use their own proprietary solutions.
52.   After the Concentration, the software development and licensing of Poseidon will be
      operated by the "EWC Equens Worldline Company" ("EWC"), a joint venture having
      its own P&L. The independence of EWC is supervised by the National Bank of the
      Netherlands (DNB) with the appointment of independent board members. For the
      avoidance of doubt, the commitments under section II shall also apply to EWC.
53.   For the avoidance of doubt, the Poseidon commitments undertaken in section II.B
      "Non- exclusive Poseidon Licensing Agreements and non-exclusive maintenance
      service agreements with third-party NSPs" shall be construed:
          <U+F02D> with regard to the FRAND terms, as relating to Poseidon as defined in Section
              A "Definitions" of this Commitment Letter and to any updates, (new)
              additional modules and functionalities undertaken by Poseidon provided that
              such modules and functionalities are used for NSP business in Germany.
              Should the modules and functionalities of Poseidon used by PaySquare for its
              NSP business in Germany be undertaken by an alternative software provided
              by Worldline, such modules and functionalities, as far as they are practically
              comparable to the functionalities of Poseidon, will be included in the scope of
              the Commitments, to the exclusion of any other module(s) and/or
              functionality(ies) of such alternative software.
          <U+F02D> with regard to the access to the source code described in paragraphs 72 to 75,
                                                   19

            as not going beyond the Poseidon source code and those elements of an
            alternative software provided by Worldline for modules and functionalities
            that are practically comparable to the functionalities of Poseidon. For the
            avoidance of doubt, the source code of module(s) and/or functionality(ies)
            undertaken by a wider alternative software solution such as Worldline Pay
            Front Office shall be excluded from the commitment to grant access to the
            source code.
54. Pursuant to the Commitments exposed in section II.B below, Worldline commits to
    grant access to the modules and functionalities used by PaySquare for the purpose of
    its NSP business in Germany and which are currently based on the use of Poseidon to
    third-party NSPs under fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and
    particularly, on no less favourable terms than the ones granted to PaySquare as
    regards Germany in all respects, including without limitation price conditions, quality
    of service, maintenance, new modules and upgrades. It is specified that Worldline
    will propose such licensing agreements under FRAND terms to the NSPs which will
    remain free to opt for these terms to the extent they would be more favourable to
    them but shall not in any case whatsoever be obliged to do so.
55. Worldline also intends to maintain and update Poseidon in a way that will
    continuously preserve performance of Poseidon and thereby proposes to enter into a
    maintenance services agreement under FRAND terms.
56. As further detailed in paragraphs 65 to 70 of the present Commitment Letter, in order
    to secure the customers as to the monitoring of the following Commitments, and in
    addition to the appointment of a Licensing Trustee which will be provided with
    contracts, documentation, pricing and invoicing conditions on a quarterly basis and
    more regularly upon request in order to enable the Licensing Trustee to check that the
    conditions applied to other NSPs are FRAND i.e. on no less favourable terms than the
    ones granted to PaySquare, Worldline also intends to set up a structured user's group
    including all NSP customers to verify on a regular basis the compliance with its
    obligation in terms of quality of service.
57. As described in Section II.B, Worldline also intends to undertake granting access to
    the source code of Poseidon to NSPs to run their NSP business so as to enable
    continuity of maintenance services with a third party operator of their choice in
    exchange of payment of a one off fee. Any NSP who requests access to its Poseidon
    source code will thereby be able to mutualize costs and develop together with any
    other NSP placed in the same situation, an alternative solution based on Poseidon,
    either internally or with a third party supplier of their choice.
                                                 20

58.   Worldline also intends to commit externalizing the management of Poseidon ZVT
      protocol to an independent and not-for-profit industry organization in exchange of a
      license back to be able to continue using the ZVT protocol. The independent industry
      organization will be able to sublicense the use of ZVT and will be in charge of
      managing the ZVT protocol notably in order to adapt it directly or indirectly as per
      regulatory requirements. Such commitment will extend third party's ability to provide
      a software solution within a reasonable time frame to the NSPs and thereby increase
      their alternative sources of supply on the long term under the conditions described in
      Section II.C.
59.   Lastly, Worldline will enable all NSPs to benefit from a discretionary option that will
      allow them to solve any potential dispute through a fast track dispute resolution
      system.
60.   Worldline therefore makes the following Commitments to address the NSPs'
      concerns. These Commitments shall remain applicable for 10 years as from the
      Effective Date except as otherwise provided in paragraph 71 of the Commitment
      Letter.
Section II.B.      Non-exclusive Poseidon Licensing Agreements and non-
                   exclusive maintenance service agreements with third-party NSPs
61.   Worldline undertakes to enter into non-exclusive, non-transferable, non-assignable
      Poseidon licensing agreements and non-exclusive maintenance service agreements
      with third-party NSPs, without right to sub-license, upon request, under fair,
      reasonable and non-discriminatory terms and on no worse terms than the ones granted
      to PaySquare.
62.   The pricing of the actual Poseidon licensing agreements is structured around three
      main aspects namely:
          <U+F02D> licensing fees set by reference to the number of modules used by the NSP
               customer which at their option may change over the time. The pricing of each
               module is made by reference to the number of transactions or number of
               transactions per month. Usually, a price list is provided to the NSP customer
               and serves as a basis for bilateral negotiations. Additional modules are subject
               to additional fees which follow the same bilateral negotiation process.
          <U+F02D> software maintenance fees are set by reference to a percentage of the license
               fee paid by the NSP customer which is adjusted on an annual basis.
          <U+F02D> Ad hoc support services fees are set by reference to a hourly rate which is
               adjusted on annual basis.
                                                    21

63. In the framework of the Poseidon licensing agreements including upgrades and new
    modules under FRAND terms notably in terms of pricing that will be proposed to
    NSP customers and entered into at their sole option, Worldline commits to the
    following:
         <U+F02D> licensing fees:
                 <U+F0A7>   existing Poseidon modules used by actual NSP customers: to the
                     extent existing NSP customers already paid the licensing fees for the
                     existing modules which they opted for, Worldline commits not to
                     request any additional fees should the NSP customers wish to opt for
                     the licensing agreements under FRAND terms for the same scope of
                     modules. NSPs having less favourable conditions than PaySquare for
                     the same existing modules may therefore opt for the licensing
                     agreement proposed under FRAND terms to benefit from more
                     favourable terms and conditions.
                 <U+F0A7>   additional modules fees for existing NSP customers will be based on a
                     public price list and the fees agreed with NSP customers willing to add
                     new modules shall in any case not be less favourable than those paid
                     by PaySquare.
                 <U+F0A7>   new NSP customers will pay a one off fixed fee for the installation of
                     the Poseidon software by reference to the number of modules used,
                     which pricing is set by reference to the number of transactions.
         <U+F02D> software maintenance fees: on top of the FRAND terms described above
             regarding the licensing fees, Worldline undertakes to freeze the maintenance
             fee to the actual percentage at the Effective date for the next 10 years, subject
             to adjustment in consideration of the inflation rate.
         <U+F02D> ad hoc support services fees: on top of the FRAND terms described above
             regarding the licensing fees, Worldline undertakes to cap the annual increase
             of the ad hoc support services fee to a maximum of 3% per year for the next
             10 years as from the Effective Date, subject to material adverse change.
64. It is specified that there will be no impact on existing licensing agreement with NSPs,
    apart from adding FRAND provisions compared to PaySquare to their benefit and
    additional guarantees in terms of software maintenance fee and ad hoc support
    services fees. In particular, Worldline will remain free to grant better price conditions
    to third-party NSPs in consideration of specific requests, and in any case, will not
    grant them less favourable price conditions than those granted to PaySquare.
65. The monitoring of Worldline's compliance with its FRAND pricing obligations will
                                                  22

    be handled by the Licensing Trustee so as to enable an objective, appropriate and
    independent management of such confidential information. The Licensing Trustee
    will to that end be granted access to all the necessary information to ensure
    compliance with this commitment, including, but not limited to the contracts, pricing
    and invoicing conditions entered into between Worldline and PaySquare on a
    quarterly basis and more regularly upon request. Moreover, and subject to the consent
    of Worldline's other NSP customers, the Licensing Trustee shall be granted access to
    these other NSP contracts on a yearly basis, as well as within 2 month as of the
    Effective Date and on its own initiative. So as to be able to proceed in practice and at
    any time to a comparison of the terms and conditions that Worldline grants to any of
    its other NSP customer to ensure compliance with its pricing undertaking, the
    Licensing Trustee shall carry out a benchmarking of the Poseidon licences within 3
    months of the Effective Date, and on a yearly basis. It shall inform Worldline, the
    other NSP customers and the Commission of its results without delay. Finally, any
    NSP customer will be able to submit its own terms and conditions to the Licensing
    Trustee at any time so as to identify the status of its treatment compared to the terms
    and conditions granted to PaySquare. Any NSP customers shall be able to opt for the
    FRAND terms at its sole option should it be more favourable. In such case, Worldline
    commits to apply the FRAND terms and conditions to the NSP so as to ensure that
    the latter has no less favourable terms than PaySquare, under the supervision of the
    Licensing Trustee.
66. As to the quality of maintenance services, Worldline undertakes to continuously
    maintain and update Poseidon in order to preserve performance of third party NSPs.
67. In addition, Worldline undertakes in its role as supplier of the Poseidon software and
    provider of related services, not to take any measure giving a competitive advantage
    to PaySquare. For example, Worldline commits to offer and/or provide Poseidon
    updates and functionalities to third party NSPs on no less favourable terms than those
    granted to PaySquare notably with regards to availability and timing. As to the
    provision of maintenance services in case of shortage of Poseidon software
    application, Worldline commits to provide support services to third party NSPs in
    priority vis-a-vis PaySquare as for example in terms of allocation of resources.
68. For the purpose of ensuring customer's satisfaction in terms of quality of services,
    Worldline undertakes to create an ad hoc user's group of Poseidon including all users
    of Poseidon application (NSPs). The user group will meet twice a year on the basis of
    an agenda that Worldline commits to send to all the members of the user's group at
    least 1 month in advance of the meeting based on the quality matters that all members
                                                23

     of the user group will have indicated in writing and in advance to Worldline so as to
     prepare the agenda. The user group may organize extraordinary meeting sessions
     upon written request of one NSP. Should such request be made by an NSP, Worldline
     commits to inform all the members of the user group and organize the meeting within
     a short time following the request.
69.  The purpose of that user's group will be to complement the Licensing Trustee's
     mandate from a quality perspective. Members of the users' group will be enabled to
     monitor on a regular basis the implementation of the maintenance services and
     updates to the application.
70.  The members of the users' group will also be able to discuss the development,
     maintenance, technical issues encountered by customers as per the use of Poseidon,
     subject to internal regulations, precise agenda and recording of the meetings, the
     presence of an antitrust counsel and the Licensing trustee. The user's group will have
     a consultancy role to guide Worldline in a transparent manner in order to improve the
     quality of services. Worldline commits to take the recommendations of the user group
     into account and make the necessary steps to implement these recommendations to
     the extent it is reasonable, possible and feasible.
71. In case of Poseidon phase out, Worldline undertakes to keep the maintenance of
    Poseidon should the NSPs wish to continue using this software solution under FRAND
    terms notably in terms of pricing as described in paragraph 63 of the present
    Commitment letter, for a duration of 5 years as from the date of the announcement of
    the phase out as communicated to customers.
72. In addition and in order to enable NSP customers to develop either internally, or in
    cooperation with another NSP customer, or with a third party supplier an alternative
    solution to Poseidon software only for its own internal NSP activity within 10 years as
    from the Effective Date, Worldline also undertakes to grant a direct access to each
    NSP customer upon written request, to the Poseidon source code it uses at the time of
    its request, together with the adaptive and curative rights subject the NSP represents
    and warrants that it will not use the Poseidon source code to develop any software
    based on or derived from the software and/or for commercial purposes, but only for its
    own internal business use. The execution of such access to Poseidon source code's
    right will be subject to the payment of a fee set at twice the amount of the annual
    maintenance fee paid by the NSP customer at the date at which it notifies the
    execution of this right. Any NSP who has paid for a license as well as for the access to
    the Poseidon source code will thereby be able to mutualize costs and develop together
    with any other NSP placed in the same situation, an alternative solution based on
    Poseidon, either internally or with a third party supplier of their choice, subject to
                                                  24

     compliance with national and EU competition rules.
73. In such case, Worldline will give a personalized CD-copy of the Poseidon source code
     which is relevant for a single NSP to this NSP and the technical assistance if requested
     by the NSP based on time and material which is to be paid by the NSP.
74. The NSP shall not transfer the Poseidon source code to any third party. By way of
     exception, the NSP may provide access to the Poseidon source code to a third party in
     charge of performing development, adaptive maintenance, curative maintenance for
     the NSP, provided that such third party shall commit not to use the Poseidon source
     code for any other purposes and that the NSP requests such maintenance for its own
     internal business use.
75. Should the NSP make such formal request to access its Poseidon source code, it will
     be able to work with a third party service provider for the development of an
     alternative to Poseidon and the provision of maintenance services. If access to the
     Poseidon source code is requested, Worldline will continue to provide maintenance
     services to the NSP for the duration of the development phase of an alternative
     solution by the NSP. Should and once the NSP carries out any maintenance himself or
     requests the provision of maintenance services to a third party, Worldline's obligations
     as to the provision of maintenance services shall immediately cease towards the said
     customer for evident reasons of liability. The obligation for the NSP to pay the
     maintenance fee would therefore no longer be valid.
76. Should Worldline wish to stop maintaining Poseidon or in case of cessation of
     Worldline's operation without successor or decision taken by a judicial authority to
     submit Worldline to winding-up proceedings or in case of material breach of the
     Commitments by Worldline notably in terms of maintenance services resulting from
     necessary regulatory requirements, sub ject such material breach is acknowledged by
     the Licensing Trustee after a contradictory debate, Worldline undertakes to grant
     access to the source code of Poseidon to the NSPs upon request under the same
     conditions as described in paragraph 72 to 75 of the present Commitment letter, except
     that in case of material breach, Worldline undertakes to grant access to the source code
     of Poseidon for free.
Section II.C.     Externalization of the governance of the ZVT protocol to an
                  independent not-for-profit organization
77. Worldline commits to assign responsibility for managing and updating ZVT Protocol,
     to an Independent Industry Body as soon as reasonably possible, but in any case
     within 6 months following the Effective Date.
                                                 25

78. The Independent Industry Body may be either a pre-existing independent organization
      aiming at technical and software standardization such as the German terminal
      manufacturer's organization named Verband der Terminalhersteller in Deutschland
      e.V159 should it accept to manage the governance of the ZVT protocol or a not-for-
      profit consortium created by Worldline, which would not be controlled (solely or
      jointly) by Worldline within the meaning of Article 3 of the Merger Regulation.
79. In any case, Membership of the Independent Industry Body shall be open to any and
      all interested parties, including NSPs, terminal manufacturers, government agencies
      and non-profit corporations. Members shall have equal voting rights and no obligation
      to have a share capital, but only to pay reasonable membership fees. Decisions
      regarding the finalization of revision to ZVT protocol would result on transparent
      decision making procedures and be based on large consensus views of members, as is
      typical in the internal procedures of standard development organizations, but with no
      veto right for any Member. The President will be appointed amongst the representative
      members excluding Worldline. Presidency of the Independent Industry Body will
      rotate every 6 months so as to enable a proper representation of all members and
      ensure the independence of such organization.
80. Worldline undertakes to grant this Independent Industry Body with an exclusive, non-
      transferable, non-assignable license on the ZVT protocol with right to sublicense and
      be remunerated by sublicensees, it being specified that the Independent Industry Body
      will be a not-for-profit organization. Should the Independent Industry Body require
      Worldline to incur costs in relation notably but not limited to updates or maintenance
      of ZVT protocol, these will be remunerated at cost by reference to hourly rates based
      on an annual bill addressed by Worldline to the Independent Industry Body for a ten
      year period as from the Effective Date.
81. The Independent Industry Body will be enabled to grant sublicenses for the use of the
      ZVT protocol to any third party, under terms and conditions defined by the
      Independent Industry Body in an open, transparent and non-discriminatory manner on
      the basis of a fixed and upfront fee.
82. In order for Worldline to continue using the ZVT protocol, the Independent Industry
      Body will also grant a free license back to Worldline under the same terms and
      conditions as those granted to third parties.
83. The Independent Industry Body will make publicly available information on its
      decision making procedures and publish its decisions.
84. Worldline will assume all reasonable costs related to the creation of such an
159 http: //www.terminalhersteller.deI
                                                    26

     Independent Industry Body.
85. During the interim period and until the acceptance of the management mandate by the
     German industry organization or the creation of the Independent Industry Body by
     Worldline, Worldline undertakes to grant a non-exclusive, non-transferable, non-
     assignable license for the use of the ZVT protocol - without the right to sublicense, to
     NSPs and terminal manufacturers under fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory terms,
     upon request.
Section II.D.     Licensing Trustee
86. Worldline shall appoint a Licensing Trustee to ensure its compliance with its
     obligations in Sections II.B and II.C here above. The provisions of paragraphs 24 to 47
     of the Divestment Commitments shall apply mutatis mutandis to the appointment of
     the Licensing Trustee, provided that the Licensing Trustee's Mandate shall reflect the
     nature of the Licensing Trustee's duties and obligations.
87. The provisions of paragraphs 45 to 47 of the Divestment Commitments shall apply
     mutatis mutandis to the replacement, discharge and reappointment of the Licensing
     Trustee. Worldline's duties and obligations pursuant to paragraphs 37 to 44 of the
     Divestment Commitments (provision of cooperation, assistance and information) shall
     also apply mutatis mutandis the Licensing Trustee.
88. The Licensing Trustee shall monitor Worldline's compliance with its obligations in
     paragraphs 50 to 85 of these Commitments, including negotiations with third parties. It
     shall arbitrate disputes arising from the application of paragraphs 90 to 12 2 after a
     contradictory debate under the supervision of the Commission. The Licensing Trustee
     shall report every 2 months to the Commission in the first two years following the
     Effective Date, then every 6 months in respect of its obligations under this paragraph,
     or at more frequent intervals if requested by the Commission to do so.
Section II.E.     Reporting Obligations
89. Worldline will report to the Licensing Trustee without delay, and every 2 months to
     the Commission, on any requests received by it from third parties to enter into
     Poseidon Licensing Agreements, the progress of negotiations with them, the grant of
     any Licenses of Poseidon and any arbitration proceedings commenced and their
     outcome. It shall also provide without delay to the Licensing Trustee and the
     Commission copies of any Poseidon Licensing Agreements that it enters into and
     copies of any arbitration awards made in compliance with the Commitments, and
     copies of the most current agreements with PaySquare in order to carry out the
                                                  27

     benchmarking.
Section II.F.      Fast track dispute resolution system
90. In order to ensure the effective implementation and to facilitate the monitoring of the
     Commitments, Worldline commits to implement a fast track dispute resolution system.
91. Such fast track dispute resolution system will be an additional option to the benefit of
     NSPs and not an obligation for them. Indeed, Worldline commits that for any dispute
     in relation to the compliance with the access to Poseidon solution and maintenance
     service, the NSP will have a discretionary right, but no obligation to solve it through
     this fast track dispute resolution system.
92. Thus, any dispute arising in relation to the compliance with the access to Poseidon
     solution and maintenance services may, if the NSP wishes so, be finally and
     exclusively resolved by the fast track dispute resolution procedure as described herein,
     in order to ensure the effective implementation and to facilitate the monitoring of the
     Commitments
93. The fast track dispute resolution procedure aims at allowing the NSP themselves to
     effectively enforce the Commitments in a timely manner, without requiring a
     permanent monitoring of the Commitments by the Commission.
94. Any Network Service Provider who wishes to avail itself of the fast track dispute
     resolution procedure (a "Requesting Party") shall send a written request (the
     "Request") to Worldline (with a copy to the Monitoring Trustee). The Request shall
     set out in detail the reasons leading the Requesting Party to believe that Worldline is
     failing to comply with the requirements of the Commitments.
95. The Requesting Party and Worldline will use their best efforts to resolve all
     differences of opinion and to settle all disputes that may arise through cooperation and
     consultation within a reasonable period of time not exceeding 15 Working Days after
     receipt of the Request.
96. The Monitoring Trustee shall present its own proposal (the "Trustee Proposal") for
     resolving the dispute within 8 Working Days, specifying in writing the action, if any,
     to be taken by Worldline in order to ensure compliance with the Commitments vis-a-
     vis the Requesting Party, and be prepared, if requested, to facilitate the settlement of
     the dispute. Worldline puts its best efforts to accomplish these actions.
97. Should the Requesting Party and Worldline (together the "Parties to the Arbitration")
     fail to resolve their differences of opinion in the above-described consultation phase,
     the Requesting Party may serve a notice (the "Notice"), in the sense of a request for
     arbitration, to the International Chamber of Commerce (hereinafter the "Arbitral
     Institution"), with a copy of such Notice to Worldline and to the Monitoring Trustee.
                                                   28

98. The Notice shall set out in detail the dispute, difference or claim (the "Dispute") and
     shall contain, inter alia, all issues of both fact and law, including any suggestions as to
     the procedure, and all documents relied upon shall be attached, e.g. documents,
     agreements, expert reports, and witness statements.
99. The Notice shall also contain a detailed description of the action to be undertaken by
     Notifying Party (including, if appropriate, a draft contract comprising all relevant
     terms and conditions) and the Trustee Proposal, including a comment as to its
     appropriateness.
100. Worldline shall, within 10 Working Days from receipt of the Notice, submit its answer
     (the "Answer"), which shall provide detailed reasons for its conduct and set out, inter
     alia, all issues of both fact and law, including any suggestions as to the procedure, and
     all documents relied upon, e.g. documents, agreements, expert reports, and witness
     statements.
101. The Answer shall, if appropriate, contain a detailed description of the action, which
     Worldline proposes to undertake vis-a-vis the Requesting Party (including, if
     appropriate, a draft contract comprising all relevant terms and conditions) and the
     Trustee Proposal (if not already submitted), including a comment as to its
     appropriateness.
                  Appointment of the Arbitrators
102. The Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of three persons having experience in intellectual
     property matters.
103. The Requesting Party shall nominate its arbitrator in the Notice; Worldline shall
     nominate its arbitrator in the Answer.
104. The arbitrators nominated by the Requesting Party and by Worldline shall, within 5
     Working Days of the nomination of the latter, nominate the chairman, making such
     nomination known to the Parties to the Arbitration and to the Arbitral Institution,
     which shall forthwith confirm the appointment of all three arbitrators.
105. Should Worldline fail to nominate an arbitrator, or if the two arbitrators fail to agree
     on the chairman, the default appointment(s) shall be made by the Arbitral Institution.
106. The three-person arbitral tribunal is herein referred to as the "Arbitral Tribunal".
                  Arbitration Procedure
107. The Dispute shall be finally resolved by arbitration under the rules of the Arbitral
     Institution with such modifications or adaptations as foreseen herein or necessary
     under the circumstances (the "Rules"). The arbitration shall be conducted in Paris,
     France in the English language.
                                                     29

108. The procedure shall be a fast-track procedure. For this purpose, the Arbitral Tribunal
     shall shorten all applicable procedural time-limits under the Rules as far as admissible
     and appropriate in the circumstances. The Parties to the Arbitration shall consent to the
     use of e-mail for the exchange of documents.
109. The Arbitral Tribunal shall, as soon as practical after its confirmation, hold an
     organizational conference to discuss any procedural issues with the Parties to the
     Arbitration.
110. Terms of Reference shall be drawn up and signed by the Parties to the Arbitration and
     the Arbitral Tribunal at the organizational meeting or immediately thereafter and a
     procedural time-table shall be established by the Arbitral Tribunal. An oral hearing
     shall, as a rule, be established within 3 weeks of the confirmation of the Arbitral
     Tribunal.
111. In order to enable the Arbitral Tribunal to reach a decision, it shall be entitled to
     request any relevant information from the Parties to the Arbitration, to appoint experts
     and to examine them at the hearing, and to establish the facts by all appropriate means.
     The Arbitral Tribunal is also entitled to ask for assistance by the Trustee in all stages
     of the procedure if the Parties to the Arbitration agree.
112. The Arbitral Tribunal shall not disclose confidential information and shall apply the
     standards attributable to confidential information under the Merger Regulation. The
     Arbitral Tribunal may take measures necessary for protecting confidential information
     in particular by restricting access to confidential information to the Arbitral Tribunal,
     the Trustee, and outside counsel and experts of the opposing party.
113. The burden of proof in any dispute under these Rules shall be borne as follows: (i) the
     Requesting Party must produce evidence of a prima facie case and (ii) if the
     Requesting Party produces evidence of a prima facie case, the Arbitral Tribunal must
     find in favour of the Requesting Party unless Worldline can produce evidence to the
     contrary.
                 Involvement of the Commission
114. The Commission shall have a discretionary right to be allowed and enabled to
     participate in all stages of the procedure by:
         <U+F02D> receiving all written submissions (including documents and reports, etc.) mad e
             by the Parties to the Arbitration;
         <U+F02D> receiving all orders, interim and final awards and other documents exchanged
             by the Arbitral Tribunal with the Parties to the Arbitration (including Terms of
             Reference and procedural time-table);
         <U+F02D> giving the Commission the opportunity to file amicus curiae briefs; and
                                                   30

         <U+F02D> being present at the hearing(s) and being allowed to ask questions to parties,
             witnesses and experts.
115. The Arbitral Tribunal shall forward, or shall order the Parties to the Arbitration to
     forward, the documents mentioned to the Commission without delay.
116. In the event of disagreement between the Parties to the Arbitration regarding the
     interpretation of the Commitments, the Arbitral Tribunal may seek the Commission's
     interpretation of the Commitments before finding in favour of any Party to the
     Arbitration and shall be bound by the interpretation.
                 Decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal
117. The Arbitral Tribunal shall decide the dispute on the basis of the Commitment and the
     Decision. Issues not covered by the Commitment and the Decision shall be decided (in
     the order as stated) by reference to the Merger Regulation, EU law and laws of the
     Federal Republic of Germany without reference to its rules of conflicts of law.
118. Each Party to the Arbitration shall submit to the Arbitral Tribunal a single proposal for
     the terms of the license. The Arbitral Tribunal shall take all decisions by majority vote.
     This Arbitral Tribunal can select one of the two submitted proposals in its entirety;
     provided, however, that the Arbitral Tribunal may, if it determines that the proposal to
     be selected contains one or more unreasonable clauses, impose alternatives to such
     clauses. With respect to the royalties to be paid, the royalties can be the one proposed
     by either party or any royalty in between. It being specified that there will be no
     additional cost, royalty fee or other fee charged to the NSP than the ones described
     above in the paragraphs relating to the license. This selection must be made by
     majority decision or, if there is no majority, by the chairman alone.
119. The Arbitral Tribunal shall in the award specify the action, if any, to be taken by
     Worldline in order to comply with the Commitments vis-a-vis the Requesting Party.
     The award shall be final and binding on the Parties to the Arbitration and shall resolve
     the Dispute and determine any and all claims, motions or requests submitted to the
     Arbitral Tribunal. The costs associated with any arbitration (including arbitration fees
     and the fees and expenses of counsel to the successful party) will be borne by the
     losing party, as determined by majority decision or, if there is no majority, by the
     chairman alone.
120. The award shall, as a rule, be rendered within 1 month after the adoption of the Terms
     of Reference; provided, however that if both Parties to the Arbitration agree, the award
     may be rendered not more than three months thereafter. The time-frame shall, in any
     case, be extended by the time required for the Commission to submit an interpretation
     of the Commitment if so requested by the Arbitral Tribunal.
                                                   31

121. The Parties to the Arbitration shall prepare a non-confidential version of the award,
     without business secrets. The Commission may publish the non-confidential version of
     the award.
122. Nothing in the arbitration procedure shall affect the power to the Commission to take
     decisions in relation to the Commitment in accordance with its powers under the
     Merger Regulation.
III.     Entry into force
123. The Commitments shall take effect upon the date of adoption of the Decision.
                                                32

SCHEDULE 1
1. The Divestment Business as operated to date has the following legal and functional
   structure:
   The Divestment Business is operated directly by PaySquare from the Netherlands and
   consists in all commercial assets and staff that contribute to the current operation or are
   necessary to ensure the viability and competitiveness of the Divestment Business, in
   particular:
            <U+F0B7>  all customer contracts entered into between PaySquare and merchants having
               their registered office in Belgium and operating a business (sales of goods and
               /or services) in Belgium (the "PaySquare Clients Portfolio") and the
               corresponding customer data and records;
            <U+F0B7>  the sales partnership agreements entered into by PaySquare on the market of
               merchant acquiring in Belgium;
            <U+F0B7>  the relevant sales, account and commercial product managers associated to the
               Divestment Business.
2. In accordance with paragraph 8 of these Commitments, the Divestment Business
   includes, but is not limited to:
       a) the following main contracts, agreements, commitments and understanding:
               <U+F0B7>   the customer contracts of the PaySquare Clients Portfolio;
               <U+F0B7>   the sales partnership agreements entered into by PaySquare on the market
                   of merchant acquiring in Belgium.
       b) the following customer, credit and other records:
               <U+F0B7>   to the best knowledge of Worldline, the PaySquare clients portfolio is
                   currently estimated at approx. [6000-7000] client accounts corresponding
                   to approx. [8000-9000] shop locations. The exact portfolio will be
                   confirmed at the Effective Date and regularly updated towards the
                   monitoring trustee.
               <U+F0B7>   all corresponding merchant data and record.
       c) the following Personnel: the s le, account and commercial product managers
           associated to the Divestment Business at the option of the purchaser;
       d) the Interim Service arrangements for the supply with the following products or
           services by Equens Worldline Company or Affiliated Undertakings for a
           transitional period of up to 24 months after Closing at the option of the purchaser:
               <U+F0B7>   operations and product management, namely:
                      i.   transaction processing i.e. technical processing of transaction,
                           namely authorisation, clearing, and settlement. EWC will pursue
                           the existing contractual relationship with CCV and OmniPay on
                           terms and conditions equivalent to those at present afforded by
                           CCV and OmniPay to Equens;
                     ii.   customer and acquirer servicing (such as the call center or fraud
                           handling): EWC will pursue the existing contractual intercompany
                                                  33

                            relationship with Equens on terms and conditions equivalent to
                            those at present afforded by Equens to PaySquare;
                    iii.    continued technical product management i.e. evolution of the
                            technical processing and servicing platform functionalities for
                            market demands and readiness for regulatory and scheme
                            compliance.
                <U+F0B7>  scheme licenses and payment institution licenses: PaySquare has generic
                   licenses for 5 payment schemes namely Visa, MasterCard, JCB, Diners,
                   UnionPay and 1 generic payment institution license from the Dutch
                   National Bank, which are not specific to the Divestment Business in
                   Belgium. The Purchaser is reasonably expected to have such licenses or to
                   obtain/extend         them         for     operating       in       Belgium.
                   Operations under the Interim Service Agreement will be conducted under
                   Worldline's licenses while the business benefits and financial risks will be
                   transferred to the Purchaser.
                <U+F0B7>  other functions as might be reasonably necessary to facilitate the
                   transition, such as an interim license to use the trademark at the option of
                   the purchaser.
3. The Divestment Business shall not include:
        <U+F0B7>  business relating to non-Belgium activities to the extent that these assets are not
           necessary for the viability and the competitiveness of the Divestment Business;
        <U+F0B7>  trademarks, service marks or brands or any licenses thereto as there is no specific
           trademark for the business undertaken by PaySquare in Belgium, only one generic
           trademark for the whole PaySquare's business which is not transferable but will be
           licensed under the Interim Service Agreement at the option of the purchaser;
        <U+F0B7>  operations (processing, servicing) and technical product management to the extent
           they are not transferable and will be provided under the Interim Service
           Agreement at the option of the purchaser;
        <U+F0B7>  scheme licenses and payment institution licenses, and other regulatory
           authorizations to the extent they are not transferable and will be provided under
           the Interim Service Agreement at the option of the purchaser.
4. If there is any asset or personnel or additional interim services which is not be covered by
   paragraph 2 of this Schedule but which is both used (exclusively or not) in the
   Divestment Business and necessary for the continued viability and competitiveness of the
   Divestment Business, that asset or adequate substitute will be offered to potential
   purchasers.
5. In addition to the Interim Service Agreement covering at the option of the purchaser the
   provision of transaction processing services for example via a back-to-back agreement,
   Worldline commits to do its best efforts to facilitate the transfer of First Data Omnipay
   and CCV contracts to the purchaser if the purchaser wishes so.
                                                    34

SCHEDULE 2
Term sheet of Poseidon licence agreement and its appendices
COMP M.7873- Worldline / Equens / PaySquare
               Schedule 2 of Commitment Letter
TERMSHEET - Poseidon software license and maintenance services agreement
Any license and maintenance services agreement entered into by Worldline GmbH
("Worldline") with a network service provider established in Germany (the "NSP") for the
use of Poseidon shall include the following terms and conditions.
Definitions
    <U+F0B7>   Agreement means the software license and maintenance services agreement
        entered into by Worldline and the NSP.
    <U+F0B7>   Ad hoc Support means the following support services which may be provided by
        Worldline to the NSP: assistance in a problem situation which can be of any kind
        (e.g. identification of hardware problems, system tuning, human errors, etc.)
    <U+F0B7>   Adaptive Maintenance means services provided by Worldline to the NSP to
        provide general implementation of Anomalies' corrections on a regular basis and to
        adapt the Software to new regulatory requirements.
    <U+F0B7>   Anomaly means a reproducible failure, bug or error preventing the use of the
        Software's functionalities in compliance with the Specifications.
    <U+F0B7>   Authorized Level means for each module of the Software ordered by the NSP, the
        right of use granted to the NSP based on the metric applicable to such module of
        the Software (e.g., number of transactions and/or number of terminals connected).
        The metric applicable to each ordered module of the Software is further defined in
        Annex 2 to the Agreement, together with the Authorized Level.
    <U+F0B7>   Curative Maintenance means provisions by Worldline to the NSP of solution,
        work around or action plan in case of Anomaly identified by Worldline or reported
        to Worldline by the NSP within the framework of a procedure to be detailed in the
        Agreement.
    <U+F0B7>   License means the limited rights to use the Software granted by Worldline to the
        NSP pursuant to the article "License" of the Agreement.

    <U+F0B7>  Maintenance Services means Curative Maintenance and Adaptive Maintenance
       services provided by Worldline to the NSP.
    <U+F0B7>  Patch means an unitary software element delivered by Worldline to the NSP to
       correct an Anomaly as part of the Curative Maintenance.
    <U+F0B7>  Software or Poseidon means the software named "Poseidon" published by
       Worldline under the trademark n° 000367912 attached in Annex 1, on the basis of
       technological developments performed to date on this software and the
       functionalities and technical features that are described in the Specifications. The
       list of the Software's modules and functionalities of Poseidon ordered by the NSP is
       specified in Annex 2. The Software includes any Update and Patch made available
       to the NSP as part of the Maintenance Services and of the Ad hoc Support.
    <U+F0B7>  Specifications means the description of the Software's technical and functional
       specifications included in Annex 2.
    <U+F0B7>  Update means any modification to the Software made available to the NSP as part
       of the Adaptive Maintenance. Updates will apply only to unmodified Software.
License
Worldline grants to the NSP a non-exclusive, non-transferrable, non-assignable right to:
<U+F02D>      install and use the Software for its internal business purposes only and within the
       limit of the authorized license volume level;
<U+F02D>      move the Software in the licensed product configuration to a replacement computer,
       which has to be supported by Worldline and therefore has to be agreed upon with
       World line beforehand;
<U+F02D>      make a copy of the Software (which does not include the source code) for archival
       and backup purposes only and a copy of the Specifications.
Such License is granted worldwide.
Restrictions on use
The NSP is only granted the rights to use the Software expressly provided for in this
Agreement. Any other use of the Software by or resulting from the NSP shall be
considered as an unauthorized use of the Software and shall be deemed to be a material
breach of the Agreement.
                                                  36

Maintenance Services
Worldline     shall provide Adaptive Maintenance and Curative Maintenance to the NSP
during the term of this Agreement. Worldline commits to make available to the NSP all
Updates and Patches promptly upon their commercial release.
Maintenance Services provided by Worldline shall be strictly limited to services described
in the Agreement. The Agreement shall not be construed as an obligation for Worldline or
any of its affiliates to provide any other maintenance services to the NSP.
Ad hoc Support
Ad hoc Support may be requested from time to time by the NSP. Upon written request by
the NSP to Worldline describing in detail required Ad hoc Support, Worldline will provide
to the NSP a fee quote for the performance of such Ad hoc Support. Worldline shall start to
perform Ad hoc Support upon written acceptance by the NSP of Worldline's fee quote.
 Price
Prices paid by the NSP to Worldline under the Agreement shall be as follows:
     <U+F02D> licensing fees:
             <U+F0B7>    existing Poseidon modules used by actual NSP customers: no additional
                  fees for NSP customers who wish to opt for the licensing agreements under
                  FRAND terms for the same scope of modules.
             <U+F0B7>    additional modules fees for existing NSP customers will be based on a
                  public price list.
             <U+F0B7>    new NSP customers will pay a one off fixed fee for the installation of the
                  Poseidon software by reference to the number of modules used, based on
                  the price list.
     <U+F02D> software maintenance fees: freeze the maintenance fee to the actual percentage for
         the next 10 years as from the date of the clearance decision of the European
         Commission in case COMP/M.7873, subject to adjustment in consideration of the
         inflation rate.
     <U+F02D> ad hoc support services fees: cap the annual increase of the ad hoc support services
         fee to a maximum of 3% per year for the next 10 years as from the date of the
                                                  37

         clearance decision of the European Commission in case COMP/M.7873, subject to
         material adverse change.
For the purpose of this clause, material adverse change shall mean any event, circumstance,
condition, fact, effect or other matter has or is likely to have a material adverse effect,
whether immediately or in the future, on the business, assets, sales revenues, condition
(financial or otherwise), prospects, results of operations or liabilities (contingent or
otherwise) of Worldline.
Intellectual property
Worldline and its third party contributors respectively retain ownership of all rights, title
and interest in and to all intellectual property rights associated with the Software and
Specifications.
Access to Source Code
The provisions in the "Access to Source Code" article of the Agreement shall only be
applicable for a period of 10 years as from the date of the clearance decision of the
European Commission in Case COMP/M.7873.
As stated in paragraph 53 of the Commitment Letter attached to the clearance decision of
the European Commission in Case COMP/M.7873, it will be specified that the provisions in
the "Access to Source Code" article of the Agreement shall be construed as not going
beyond the Poseidon source code and those elements of an alternative software provided by
Worldline for modules and functionalities that are practically comparable to the
functionalities of Poseidon. For the avoidance of doubt, the "Access to the Source Code"
article of the Agreement will also specify that the source code of module(s) and/or
functionality(ies) undertaken by a wider alternative software solution such as Worldline Pay
Front Office shall be excluded from the commitment to grant access to the source code.
Upon written request of the NSP, Worldline shall provide the NSP with the source code
corresponding to the Software for which rights have been granted to the NSP under the
Agreement ("Source Code"). The NSP may request access to the Source Code in the
following circumstances:
                                                 38

    <U+F02D> NSP's decision to develop either internally or with a third party supplier an
        alternative solution to the Software;
    <U+F02D> material breach of Worldline's Maintenance Services obligations under the
        Agreement, provided that such material breach is acknowledged by the licensing
        trustee appointed by Worldline to ensure Worldline's commitments pursuant to EC
        Decision COMP. M.7873;
    <U+F02D> cessation of Worldline' operation without successor; or
    <U+F02D> decision taken by a judicial authority to submit Worldline to winding-up
        proceedings.
The Source Code shall be delivered by Worldline to the NSP in a CO-copy of the Poseidon
source code which is relevant for a single NSP to this NSP, subject to the payment by the
NSP of a fee amounting to two (2) times the annual maintenance fee paid by the NSP,
except that in case of material breach, Worldline undertakes to grant access to the source
code of Poseidon for free. The technical assistance if requested by the NSP will be based on
time and material which is to be paid by the NSP.
In case of access to the Source Code, Worldline grants to the NSP a personal, non-
exclusive, non-transferable, non-assignable right to:
    <U+F02D> use the Software for its internal business purposes only and within the limit of the
        Authorized Level set forth in Annex 2 to the Agreement;
    <U+F02D> move the Software in the licensed product configuration to a replacement
        computer;
    <U+F02D> perform Adaptive Maintenance and Curative Maintenance.
Such license shall be granted worldwide and expire on the date upon which the NSP stops
using the Software.
The NSP represents and warrants that it will not use the Source Code to develop either
internally and/or with a third party supplier any software based on or derived from the
Software for commercial purposes. The NSP shall not transfer the Source Code to any third
party. By way of exception, the NSP may provide access to the Source Code to a third party
supplier in charge of performing Adaptive Maintenance and /or Curative Maintenance for
the NSP, provided that such third party shall commit not to use the Source Code for any
other purposes.
                                                 39

Additionally, if access to the Poseidon source code is requested, Worldline will continue
to provide maintenance services to the NSP for the duration of the development phase of
an alternative solution by the NSP. However, should and once the NSP carries out any
maintenance himself or requests the provision of maintenance services to a third party,
Worldline's obligations as to the provision of maintenance services shall immediately
cease towards the said customer for evident reasons of liability. The obligation for the
NSP to pay the maintenance fee would therefore no longer be valid.
Liability
In no event shall Worldline be liable to the NSP for any indirect damages, including any
lost profits, lost savings, Joss of use, lost data, failure of security mechanisms, interruption
of business as far as permitted by law.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Agreement, Worldline's total aggregate
liability under the Agreement in case of gross negligence shall be limited to proven direct
damages caused by Worldline in an amount not to exceed the fees actually paid by the
NSP to Worldline under the Agreement during the twelve (12) month period immediately
preceding the date of the claim. Worldline's total aggregate liability under the Agreement
in case of simple negligence shall be limited to proven direct damages caused by
Worldline in an amount not to exceed seventy-five per cent (75%) of the fees actually
paid by the NSP to Worldline under the Agreement during the twelve (12) month period
immediately preceding the date of the claim.
Warranty
The Software shall comply with the Specifications.
Except as expressly provided in the Agreement, Worldline does not make any kind of
representation or warranty. The Software is provided "AS-IS" and Worldline does not
warrant that the functions contained in the Software will be uninterrupted or error-free.
Duration
This Agreement is entered into for an indefinite duration and may be terminated by any of
the parties upon a written notice of termination at least six (6) months provided however
                                                     40

that Worldline shall not be entitled to give such written notice of termination to the NSP
before 10 years as from the date of the clearance decision of the European Commission in
Case COMP/M. 7873 except in case of Poseidon phase out or Access to the Source Code.
In case of Poseidon phase out, Worldline undertakes to keep the maintenance of Poseidon
should the NSPs wish to continue using this software solution for duration of 5 years as
from the date of the announcement of the phase out as communicated to customers.
Termination
Either party may terminate the Agreement if the other party: (a) fa ils to cure any material
breach of the Agreement within thirty (30) days after written notice of such breach; (b)
ceases operation without a successor; or (c) seeks protection under any bankruptcy,
insolvency, creditors arrangement, composition or comparable proceeding, or if any such
proceeding is instituted against such party. Furthermore, Worldline may terminate the
Agreement if the NSP is in default with two (2) monthly instalments, unless the NSP has
disputed those instalments in writing with good cause.
Upon expiration or termination of the Agreement for any reason: (a) unless the NSP
accesses to the Source Code within the conditions set forth in the Article "Access to
Source Code" of the Agreement, the NSP shall cease any a nd all use of the Software, and
destroy all copies of the latter and of the documentation and so certify to Worldline in
writing; (b) each party will return to the other party the confidential information of the
other party that it obtained during the course of the Agreement; and (c) any amounts
owed to Worldline under the Agreement before termination will be immediately due and
payable.
Governing Law
The Agreement shall be governed by German law.
Jurisdiction
Unless the NSP opts for the application of the fast track dispute resolution procedure
provided for in EC Decision COMP.M.7873, the courts of Frankfurt am Main in Germany
shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any disputes relating to the Agreement.
                                                 41

Conflicting Terms
In case of conflict or contradictions between negotiated provisions and mandatory terms and
conditions applicable to the Agreement, such mandatory terms and conditions shall prevail.
ANNEX 1
Software trademark registration
ANNEX2
Software modules, metrics and Authorized Level
                                                 42
