                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                Brussels, 26.05.2016
                                                                C(2016) 3264 final
 In the published version of this decision, some
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article                       PUBLIC VERSION
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information                       MERGER PROCEDURE
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.
To the notifying parties:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case M.7877 - WARBURG PINCUS / GENERAL ATLANTIC /
                UNICREDIT / SANTANDER / SAM / PIONEER
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the European Economic
                Area2
(1)         On 15 April 2016, the European Commission received a notification of a proposed
            concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by
            which affiliates of Warburg Pincus (“Warburg Pincus”, United States), General
            Atlantic LLC (“General Atlantic”, United States), Banco Santander, S.A.,
            ("Santander", Spain) and Unicredit S.p.A. ("UniCredit", Italy) combine the asset
            management businesses of SAM Investment Holdings Limited (“SAM”) and
            Pioneer Global Asset Management S.p.A. (together with its subsidiaries, but
            excluding Pioneer Investment Management USA Inc. and its US subsidiaries as
            well as certain of its other subsidiaries (“Pioneer”)), in a joint venture controlled by
            Warburg Pincus, General Atlantic, Santander and UniCredit (the "JV"). SAM is
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
          the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
          replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
          the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2         OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

      currently a joint venture between Santander and affiliates of Warburg Pincus and
      General Atlantic. Pioneer is currently solely controlled by UniCredit.3
(2)   Warburg Pincus, General Atlantic, Santander and UniCredit are designated
      hereinafter as the 'Parties'.
1.    THE PARTIES
(3)   Warburg Pincus is a member-owned global private equity firm, active through its
      portfolio companies in a variety of sectors, including energy, financial services,
      healthcare and consumer, industrial and business services, and technology, media
      and telecommunications. Warburg Pincus is controlled by the individuals Charles
      R. Kaye and Joseph P. Landy.4
(4)   General Atlantic is a member-owned private equity firm, active through its
      portfolio companies in a variety of sectors, including business services, retail and
      consumer, financial services, healthcare, internet and technology. […].
(5)   Santander is the parent company of an international group of banking and
      financial companies operating mainly in Europe, the U.S., and Latin America.
      Santander is not controlled by any other undertaking.
(6)   UniCredit is the Italian parent company of a banking group providing banking and
      financial services in Italy and abroad and is not controlled by any other
      undertaking.
(7)   SAM is an asset management business with operations in Europe and Latin
      America. SAM is a joint venture between Warburg Pincus, General Atlantic and
      Santander.5 SAM’s products are distributed through: (i) Santander’s retail banking
      network in different countries; (ii) Santander or SAM directly or through sub-
      advisors to institutional clients; and (iii) third parties, […]. SAM is a full function
      joint venture owned and controlled by Sherbrooke Acquisition Corp SPC (an
      investment vehicle jointly controlled by Warburg Pincus and General Atlantic)
      (“Sponsor Entity”) and Santander.6
(8)   Pioneer is an asset management business with operations across Europe and in
      several non-European countries and it is a wholly-owned subsidiary of UniCredit.
      Pioneer is active in asset management through: (i) Pioneer Investment Management
      USA Inc. and its group in the U.S.; and (ii) direct and indirect subsidiaries
      (including joint venture arrangements in certain jurisdictions) in the rest of the
      world. The proposed transaction does not include Pioneer Investment Management
      USA Inc. and its US subsidiaries as well as certain of its other subsidiaries. These
      entities are part of a parallel transaction through which Warburg Pincus, General
      Atlantic and Unicredit acquire joint control over those entities. That parallel
      transaction was notified to the Commission separately and was approved
      unconditionally on 23 March 2016 (Case M.7874 – Warburg Pincus/General
      Atlantic/Unicredit/Pioneer US).
3   Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 144, 23 April 2016, p. 21.
4   Mr Kaye and Mr Landy do not control any other undertakings outside of the Warburg Pincus group
    that are active in related businesses.
5   M.6971 – Warburg Pincus/General Atlantic/Santander/Santander Asset Management.
6   M.6971 – Warburg Pincus/General Atlantic/Santander/Santander Asset Management.
                                                      2

2.    THE CONCENTRATION
(9)   The proposed transaction comprises two stages:
(10)  In phase 1, Pioneer will be re-organised internally to separate the US business from
      the non-US business and certain out-of-scope entities. This includes the
      incorporation of two new companies (RoWCo and TopCo) with the aim that
      TopCo will hold the non-US entities of Pioneer through RoWCo.
(11)  In phase 2, SAM will acquire 100% of the shares in RoWCo from TopCo in
      exchange for an issue of shares in SAM to TopCo and cash consideration. As a
      result, TopCo will hold 1/3 of the shares in SAM. Further, the Sponsor Entity will
      acquire shares in TopCo in exchange for 100% of its interest in SAM. The Sponsor
      Entity will then subscribe for additional shares in TopCo in order that it holds a
      50% interest in TopCo. The acquisition of the Sponsor Entity’s interest in SAM by
      TopCo will increase TopCo’s interest in SAM to 2/3. Ultimately, and as set out in
      Figure 1, Santander, Unicredit and the Sponsor Entity will each indirectly hold 1/3
      of the shares in SAM and RoWCo.
      Figure 1 Simplified corporate structure post-transaction
     UniCredit                     Sponsor Entity                           Santander
         50 %*                          50 %
                      TopCo
                                         2/3
                                                            1/3*
                                          SAM
                                       RoWCo                                     *indirect
               Combination of Pioneer’s and SAM’s operations outside
               the U.S., operating in over 30 countries (e.g. Europe,
               CEE, Latin America and Asia)
(12)  As a result, the non-US business of Pioneer and the business of SAM will
      ultimately be jointly controlled by the Parties. […] each of the Parties will be able
      to veto […], all of which constitute strategic commercial decisions conferring
      decisive influence over SAM in accordance with paragraph (69) of the
      Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice7.
7    Commission Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1), "CJN".
                                                    3

(13)    Based on the information submitted by the Parties, SAM will manage its own
        portfolio, will act on its own behalf on the market and it will carry out its own sales
        and marketing functions and hence perform on a lasting basis all the functions of
        an autonomous economic entity.
(14)    In particular, SAM will have a dedicated Board of Directors for its day-to-day
        operations comprising 11 directors, over 500 members of staff, access to
        independent financing as well as all assets and resources required to function
        independently on the market. It will continue its customer facing activities and its
        activities will go beyond one specific function within the Parties’ business
        activities as SAM will have its own access to and presence on the market.
(15)    It is envisaged that, post-Transaction, Santander and UniCredit will distribute
        mutual funds created by SAM in certain EU jurisdictions. The Parties estimate that,
        on an EEA-wide basis, about […]% of SAM's asset management products will be
        distributed by either Santander or UniCredit. However these distribution
        relationships will be carried out […].8 Also, these relationships will not be
        exclusive since SAM will be able to appoint third party distributors.
(16)    On this basis, the proposed transaction constitutes a concentration within the
        meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
3.      EU DIMENSION
(17)    Based on the principle to look at the “economic reality of the operation to
        determine which are the undertakings concerned” laid down in paragraph (145) the
        Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice, SAM's parent companies should be considered
        as the real drivers behind the operation due to their significant involvement in the
        initiation, organization, and financing of the operation. Based on the same
        principle, the Sponsor Entity's parent companies should be considered as the
        undertakings concerned since the Sponsor Entity is merely an investment vehicle.
        Accordingly, each of Warburg Pincus, General Atlantic, Santander and UniCredit
        constitute undertakings concerned. However, the assessment of the EU dimension
        of the transaction would remain unchanged if, alternatively, SAM (instead of each
        of Warburg Pincus, General Atlantic and Santander) or the Sponsor Entity (instead
        of each of Warburg Pincus and General Atlantic) were to be considered
        undertakings concerned.
(18)    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
        more than EUR 5 000 million9 (General Atlantic: EUR 3 797 million, Warburg
        Pincus: EUR 14 682 million, Santander: EUR 76 793 million, UniCredit: EUR
        21 365 million). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR
        250 million (General Atlantic: EUR 471 million, Warburg Pincus: EUR
        1 329 million, Santander: EUR […], UniCredit: EUR 20 108 million), but they do
        not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one
        and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension.
8    CJN, paragraph 98.
9    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
     Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
                                                        4

4.         RELEVANT MARKETS
(19)       The proposed transaction gives rise to horizontally affected national markets in
           Poland for:
           (i) the provision of open retail mutual funds;
           (ii) the provision of open retail money market funds; and
           (iii) a possible product market comprising both these markets, namely the market
           for overall open asset management for retail clients.
(20)       In Poland SAM is active in open asset management for retail clients by offering
           open retail mutual funds and open retail money market funds via BZ WBK
           Towarzystwo Funduszy Inwestycyjnych S.A. Pioneer offers both open retail
           mutual funds and open retail money market funds via Pioneer Pekao Towarzystwo
           Funduszy Inwestycyjnych S.A.
4.1.       Overall open asset management for retail clients
4.1.1.     Relevant product market
(21)       In previous cases, the Commission considered that one may distinguish a relevant
           product market for (overall) asset management, including the creation and
           managing of mutual funds for retail clients, the tailor-made funds for corporate and
           institutional customers, and portfolio management for private investors, pension
           funds and institutions.10 The Commission has, however left open the question of
           whether these individual products constitute separate relevant product markets,
           with the exception of portfolio management services (i.e. private banking), which
           have been considered a separate market.11
(22)       The exact definition of the relevant product market can be left open as in all
           possible scenarios the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
           compatibility with the internal market.
4.1.2.     Relevant geographic market
(23)       In previous decisions12, the Commission considered that certain markets for asset
           management might be national and others EEA-wide/international in scope.
(24)       The exact definition of the relevant geographic market can be left open as in all
           possible scenarios the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
           compatibility with the internal market.
10     E.g. M.5384 – BNP Paribas/Fortis, para. 58; M.6812 – SFPI/Dexia, para. 31; M.5580 –
       BlackRock/Barclays GIH, para. 9.
11     M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets, para. 68. Open funds do not have any restrictions on the number
       of investors, whereas closed funds are usually tailor-made for a small group of investors and are not
       distributed through retail channels.
12     E.g. M.3894 – UniCredito/HVB, para. 42; M.5384 - BNP Paribas/Fortis, para. 75; M.5580 –
       BlackRock/Barclays GIH, para. 14.
                                                          5

4.2.       Sub-segments of open retail mutual funds and open retail money market funds
4.2.1.     Relevant product markets
(25)       In a previous case, the Commission found that there are separate markets for
           (i) open retail mutual funds, (ii) open retail money market funds and (iii) workplace
           savings schemes. The Commission found that mutual funds and money market
           funds constituted different markets because mutual funds are used for longer-term
           investments whereas money market funds are relatively short-term investment
           vehicles.13
(26)       The exact definition of the relevant product market can be left open as in all
           possible scenarios the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
           compatibility with the internal market.
4.2.2.     Relevant geographic markets
(27)       In a previous case, the Commission considered that the geographic scope of the
           markets for open retail mutual funds as well as for money market funds was
           national in scope.14
(28)       The exact definition of the relevant geographic market can be left open as in all
           possible scenarios the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
           compatibility with the internal market.
4.3.       Possible additional segmentations
(29)       The Commission has also discussed the possibility of further segmenting the
           markets for asset management for institutional clients and retail clients by type of
           management (active vs. passive).15 Active asset management consists of strategies
           in which the investment manager makes specific investments with the goal of
           outperforming a benchmark, passive asset management consists of strategies which
           merely seek to replicate the performance of an index and rely more on technology.
           Passive asset management services therefore normally have lower management
           fees than active asset management services.16
(30)       Furthermore, in a previous case the Commission discussed with respect to asset
           management in France whether products sold within a life insurance “envelope”
           should form part of the same product market as retail mutual funds sold on a
           standalone basis.17
(31)       It can however be left open whether such further segmentations are warranted as
           even then the proposed transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
           compatibility with the internal market.
13     M.5728 – Crédit Agricole/Société Générale Asset Management, para. 58.
14     M.5728 – Crédit Agricole/Société Générale Asset Management, para. 84.
15     M.5580 – BlackRock/Barclays GIH, para. 10; M. 5341 – Allianz/Cominvest, para. 15. With respect to
       retail funds, this was left open.
16     M.5580 – BlackRock/Barclays GIH, footnote 6, and Case No. COMP/M.5728 – Crédit Agricole/Société
       Générale Asset Management, para. 35.
17     M.5728 – Crédit Agricole/Société Générale Asset Management, para. 82.
                                                        6

5.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
(32) The competitive assessment takes into account the affected markets, which are all
     located in Poland.
(33) For the affected markets in Poland, the Parties provided market share information
     on the basis of reports from the Polish Chamber of Fund and Asset Management
     (Izba Zarzadzajacych Funduszami i Aktywami, "IZFiA") and taking into account
     their own revenues in each relevant market. The IZFiA data comprises the value of
     assets under management ("AuM") data reported by all Polish asset management
     companies concerning different asset management products and calculates the total
     size of the relevant type of asset management products and individual market
     shares. In the context of the market investigation, the market participants contacted
     confirmed that the IZFiA data, which the Parties submitted, as well as the
     corresponding market share information are reliable and provide an accurate
     indication of the Polish market.
(34) As regards the overall open asset management for retail clients in Poland, SAM
     and Pioneer had a combined market share of [20-30]% in 2014, measured on the
     basis of AuM in PLN. Post-transaction, the combined entity would be the largest
     operator in the Polish market in this segment. The next biggest operator would be
     PKO with a market share of [10-20]% (by AuM), followed by ING (now named
     NN) with a share of [10-20]% (by AuM), Union Investment with a share of
     [5-10]% (by AuM) and PZU with a share of [5-10]% (by AuM).
(35) As regards open retail mutual funds in Poland, SAM and Pioneer had a combined
     market share of [20-30]% (by AuM) in 2014. Post-transaction, the combined entity
     would be the largest operator in the Polish market in this segment. The next biggest
     operator would be ING with a share of [10-20]% (by AuM), followed by PKO with
     a share of [10-20]% (by AuM) and PZU with a share of [5-10]% (by AuM).
(36) As regards open retail money market funds in Poland, SAM and Pioneer had a
     combined market share of [20-30]% (by AuM) in 2014. PKO would have an
     almost identical share of [20-30]% (by AuM), followed by Union Investment with
     a share of [10-20]% (by AuM) and Millenium with a share of [0-5]% (by AuM).
(37) If further sub-segmentations of the relevant markets into active and passive asset
     management were to be made, the Parties' market shares would change only
     marginally as essentially all open retail mutual funds and open retail money market
     funds in Poland are active funds. No further affected markets would arise in this
     segment. The Parties' activities do not overlap in passive asset management and no
     affected markets would arise in respect of active asset management for institutional
     clients. Moreover, if products sold within a life insurance “envelope” were
     considered to form part of the same product market as retail mutual funds sold on a
     standalone basis, the situation would not change significantly.
(38) The Polish market in all of the affected markets is rather fragmented with a number
     of additional asset management companies present. A number of these operators
     are, like the Parties, vertically integrated, meaning that they are part of a larger
     banking group of companies acting as a distribution channel for asset management
     products.
                                               7

(39)   Moreover, new market entry occurred in the past years both by national and
       international players and future entry can be expected. According to the Parties, at
       least nine companies have entered one or more of the affected markets over the last
       five years, namely Agio Funds, Altus, Amundi, AXA, BGZ BNP Paribas, BPS,
       Caspar, EQUES Investments, and Open Finance. In addition, the Parties consider
       that Goldman Sachs could enter the affected markets, based on information
       provided in the press. Moreover, Franklin Tempelton and JP Morgan Asset
       management sell foreign-domiciled retail funds in Poland and both companies
       could apply for a license to set up a local branch.
(40)   As a result, although SAM and Pioneer together would become the largest operator
       in the Polish market in all of those segments, there are currently no indications that
       the proposed transaction would result in a significant impediment to effective
       competition.
(41)   The market participants contacted in the market investigation raised no specific
       concerns as regards the effect of the proposed transaction on competition in Poland.
       In particular, none of the customers contacted in the market investigation raised
       any concerns about the transaction.
(42)   Likewise, competitors18 indicated that the merged entity would continue to face
       competition from other operators, including strong vertically integrated entities.
(43)   One of the contacted competitors mentioned that the combination of SAM's and
       Pioneer's activities may reduce access to distribution networks for independent
       asset managers (i.e., asset managers that are not part of a larger banking group).19
       However, the market investigation in the Polish market did not substantiate these
       concerns.
(44)   Another contacted competitor stated that the proposed transaction would be
       unlikely to have significant foreclosure effects based on a possible limitation of
       access for independent asset managers to distribution networks, pointing out that
       SAM and Pioneer already distribute their products primarily through their
       respective own banking networks.20 This competitor also stated that there are some
       banking networks in Poland, e.g. Citibank, Deutsche Bank, Raiffeisen, mBank or
       BÓS, which do not have their own investment fund providers and which therefore
       generally distribute the asset management products of other companies, including
       those of independent asset managers.21
(45)   In light of all the evidence available to it, the Commission considers that the
       transaction is unlikely to result in foreclosure of independent asset managers or any
       other competition concerns.
18   Confidential minutes of a telephone conference with a competitor of 3 March 2016.
19   Confidential minutes of a telephone conference with a competitor of 2 March 2016.
20   Confidential minutes of a telephone conference with a competitor of 3 March 2016.
21   Confidential minutes of a telephone conference with a competitor of 3 March 2016.
                                                       8

6.   CONCLUSION
(46) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
     notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
     EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
     Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                  For the Commission
                                                  (signed)
                                                  Phil HOGAN
                                                  Member of the Commission
                                             9
