                                       EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                   Brussels, 14.6.2016
In the published version of this decision, some                    C(2016) 3776 final
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004                                PUBLIC VERSION
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information                           MERGER PROCEDURE
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
   To the notifying party:
   Dear Sir/Madam,
   Subject:         Case M.7944 - CREDIT MUTUEL / GE CAPITAL'S FACTORING AND
                    EQUIPMENT FINANCING BUSINESSES IN FRANCE AND
                    GERMANY
                    Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                    No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the European Economic
                    Area2
   (1)         On 4 May 2016, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
               concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which the Banque
               Fédérative du Crédit Mutuel ("BFCM", France) within the Crédit Mutuel Group
               ("Crédit Mutuel", France) acquires within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the
               Merger Regulation control of the factoring and equipment financing activities of
               the General Electric Group ("GE", USA), organised through their subsidiary GE
               Capital ("GE Capital") in France and Germany ("Target Businesses") by way of
               purchase of shares and assets (the "Transaction").3 Crédit Mutuel and the Target
               Businesses are designated hereinafter as the "Parties".
   1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
             the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
             replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
             the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
   2         OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
   3         Publication in OJ C 174, 14.05.2016, p. 15.
   Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
   Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
   Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

1.     THE PARTIES
    The Notifying Party
(2)    Crédit Mutuel is a French bank and insurance group, active in corporate and retail
       banking as well as life and non-life insurance activities. It is organised in a
       decentralised structure based on three levels: (i) local banks, (ii) regional groups,
       and (iii) a national confederation. It includes two divisions: the mutual banking
       division and the capital division. The capital division consists of BFCM and its
       various subsidiaries specialised by business line (insurance, factoring, consumer
       credit, real estate, equipment leasing, etc.) both in France and abroad.
(3)    The activities relevant for the Transaction involve factoring and equipment
       financing for business customers in France and Germany. In France, Crédit Mutuel
       provides (i) factoring via CM-CIC Factor and (ii) equipment finance services via
       CM-CIC Bail, Arkea Crédit Bail and Bail Actea. These entities also offer, to a
       lesser extent, insurance distribution services in relation to their equipment finance
       activities.
(4)    In Germany, Crédit Mutuel is not active in factoring but offers equipment
       financing, albeit limited to financial leasing in form of "crédit-bail" through its
       local subsidiaries.
    The Target Businesses
(5)    GE is a multinational technology company, headquartered in the US. GE ultimately
       controls GE Capital, a provider of financial services and products to businesses of all
       sizes and households around the world. GE Capital intends to sell parts of it activities,
       namely its factoring and equipment financing businesses in France and Germany to
       BFCM.
(6)    In France, the Transaction encompasses the following two target companies that are
       currently 100% controlled by GE Capital: (a) Titrifact notes ("Titrifact", France), a
       securitisation special purpose vehicle ("fonds commun de titrisation"), and
       (b) Factofrance SAS ("Factofrance", France) which in turn has a shareholding of
       (i) 100% in Société d’Assurance de Courtages et d’Études de Risque SARL
       ("SACER", France), (ii) 100% in GE Capital Equipment Finance SAS ("GE Capital
       Equipment Finance", France), (iii) 50% in Factor Soft SAS ("Factorsoft", France) and
       (iv) 64% in Cofacrédit SAS ("Cofacrédit", France).
(7)    In Germany, the Target Businesses are currently 100% subsidiaries of GE Capital and
       consist of (i) GE Capital Leasing GmbH ("GE Capital Leasing", Germany), (ii) GE
       Capital Solutions Investment GmbH ("GE Capital Solutions", Germany), and
       (iii) Heller GmbH ("Heller", Germany). Heller operates its business via two
       subsidiaries: GE Capital Factoring GmbH ("GE Capital Factoring", Germany) and
       GE Capital Bank AG ("GE Capital Bank", Germany) that are both part of the
       transaction.
(8)    In addition, GE Capital will transfer 100% of shares of Quanta
       Grundstücksverwaltungsgesellschaft mbH & Co. oHG ("Quanta", Germany) and a
       49% shareholding in Commerz Factoring GmbH ("CommerzFactoring", Germany),
       the rest of the shareholding being owned by Commerzbank.
                                                 2

2.       THE OPERATION
(9)      The Transaction will be implemented through a share and asset purchase agreement
         between BFCM on the one hand and the current holding companies of the Target
         Businesses within GE Capital on the other hand. These are (i) GE Capital SAS,
         (ii) Heller Netherlands Holding BV, (iii) GE Business Services GmbH, and (iv) GE
         Capital International Holdings Limited.
3.       EU DIMENSION
(10)     The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of more
         than EUR 5 000 million4 (Crédit Mutuel: [Business secrets: turnover]; Target
         Businesses: [Business secrets: turnover]). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in
         excess of EUR 250 million (Crédit Mutuel: [Business secrets: turnover]; Target
         Businesses: [Business secrets: turnover]). While Crédit Mutuel achieves more than
         two-thirds of its aggregate EU-wide turnover in France, this is not the case for the
         Target Businesses. The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension under
         Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
4.       RELEVANT MARKETS
(11)     The Parties' commercial activities overlap in relation to factoring in France and
         equipment financing in the form of leasing to business customers in France and
         Germany. They also offer insurance distribution services but only in connection with
         their leasing activities and therefore have limited activities in this area. Insurance
         distribution services will consequently not be further analysed.
4.1.     Relevant Product Markets
4.1.1.   Factoring
(12)     Factoring is a type of financing intended to provide liquidity to business customers.
         It is structured as a form of lending against all kinds of receivables. It involves a
         business client contracting to assign some or all of the invoices for sales made to its
         own customers to a factoring company. In return, the factoring company provides
         one or more of the following: (i) a prepayment or advance on the value of the
         invoices; (ii) invoice collection and sales ledger management services; and
         (iii) credit insurance protecting the client against a customer’s inability to pay an
         invoice within a period of time.5 Services comprising a package of all the above
         can be referred to as "full factoring".
(13)     Factoring has previously been considered by the Commission and the French
         Competition Authority as a separate market from other financing services. The
         question whether the market should be further sub-divided was left open.6
4      Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission Consolidated Jurisdictional
       Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
5      Cases COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro Assets; COMP/M.2577 – GE Capital / Heller Financial.
6      Cases COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, paragraph 30; COMP/M.4155 BNP Paribas / BNL, paragraph 15; see the
       decision of the FCA n 09-DCC-16 of 22 June 2009 on the merger between the Caisse d’Epargne and Banque Populaire
       groups, §122.
                                                                  3

(14)     Most suppliers of factoring services provide similar types of services, according to
         both customers and competitors that responded to the market investigation,7 which is
         indicative of supply-side substitutability.
(15)     For the purpose of the present case, it can be left open whether the market should be
         further sub-divided since the transaction will not raise serious doubts as to the
         compatibility with the internal market in any alternative product market definition.
4.1.2.   Leasing
(16)     Equipment financing enables customers to acquire the use of a wide range of assets,
         ranging across office equipment, IT/telecoms equipment, medical equipment,
         vehicles, etc.8 Companies and individuals can finance the use of equipment through a
         variety of financing means, including leasing, loans, etc. In this case, the overlapping
         activities of the Parties are restricted to leasing to business customers.
(17)     The Commission has analysed the market for leasing services in several past cases. In
         COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis, the Commission considered the potential
         distinction between operating and financial leasing products due to their distinct
         business models and offerings to the business customer, particularly in relation to the
         ownership status of the leased assets and the risks associated.9 In addition, a major
         differentiating criterion from a lessee perspective is the intention and the associated
         price to buy the leased assets at the end of the leasing period. While this purchasing
         option is usually attractive and regularly executed for financial leasing, operating
         lease contracts usually do not contain special residual value purchase options.10 In
         COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis, the Commission also considered that car fleet
         leasing could be distinguished from other types of leasing but ultimately left the
         question open.11 The French Competition Authority analysed the leasing market in
         several cases, distinguishing between leasing to individuals and leasing to businesses.
         It also considered the various options (operating leasing, financial leasing, hire
         purchase leasing, car fleet leasing), as well as other potential segmentations (by type
         of assets leased or by size of customers), but ultimately left the definition open.12
(18)     Although some types of assets are leased by specialised providers, most customers to
         the market investigation consider that suppliers are in general able to provide all types
         of leasing assets they need.13 All suppliers that responded to the market investigation
         also indicated that they lease all types of assets such as office equipment, IT hardware
         and software, healthcare equipment, passenger cars, other transportation equipment
         (such as heavy vehicles, commercial vans, etc.), construction and material handling
         equipment, agriculture equipment, etc.
7      Questionnaires on factoring, Q1 to competitors (Question 1) and Q2 to customers (Question 5).
8      Case COMP/M.2577 – GE Capital / Heller Financial, paragraph 12 and following.
9      Case COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, paragraph 61 and following.
10     Case COMP/M.5217 – GEFA / PEMA, paragraph 8.
11     Case COMP/M.5384 - BNP Paribas / Fortis, paragraph 61 and following.
12     Décision of the FCA n 10-DCC-128 of 30 September 2010 on the acquisition of sole control of Sodelem by CIC; Decision of
       the FCA n 10-DCC-150 of 28 October 2010 on the acquisition of sole control over Leasecom Group by Crédit Mutuel Arkea.
13     Questionnaires on leasing, Q3 to competitors (Question 1) and Q4 to customers (Question 5).
                                                                    4

(19)     The Parties claim that the market for leasing services is not structurally different for
         different sizes of customers and that all relevant competitors serve small, medium and
         large sized companies. The market investigation did not give any indications that the
         Parties would be particularly close competitors for any specific type of customer nor
         does any competitive concern arise in any of these three potential sub-segments. The
         question of further sub-segmentation by size of customer can therefore be left open
         for the purpose of the present case.
(20)     In light of the above, the question of whether leasing services should be further
         subdivided (i) between operating leasing, financial leasing (itself split between hire
         purchase leasing/crédit-bail and other financial leasing), and car fleet leasing, (ii) by
         type of assets, or (iii) by size of customers can be left open in the case at hand, as the
         Transaction does not give rise to competition concerns in any of these segments.
4.2.     Relevant Geographic Markets
4.2.1.   Factoring
(21)     In its past decisions, the Commission has considered the geographic market definition
         for factoring to be national in scope.14 In the present case, the Parties only overlap in
         factoring in France, given that Crédit Mutuel does not offer factoring services in
         Germany, unlike the Target Businesses. The geographic scope for factoring for this
         case can therefore be restricted to France.
4.2.2.   Leasing
(22)     In previous decisions, the Commission has considered the market for leasing services
         to be at least national in scope.15 In the present case the market will be analysed on a
         national basis in view of the fact that the Parties' activities only overlap in France and
         Germany, but the exact definition of the geographic market can be left open.
5.       COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
5.1.     Factoring
(23)     Based on the figures provided by the Parties, the combined market shares of the
         Parties for factoring in France amount to approximately [20-30%], with [10-20%] for
         Crédit Mutuel and [10-20%] for the Target Businesses.16 Although the Parties will
         become the largest player in the market for factoring in France post-merger, they will
         continue to face competition from three additional competitors that account for more
         than 15% market share each (BNP Paribas, Crédit Agricole, and Société Générale)
         and one player with a market share […] below 15% (BPCE).
(24)     Under a hypothetical separate assessment of several sub-types of factoring, the
         highest market share would arise in a separate "full-factoring" segment. In this case,
         the combined shares of the Parties would amount to approximately [30-40%].
14     Cases COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito / HVB, paragraph 42; COMP/M.4155 – BNP Paribas / BNL; COMP/M.4844 – Fortis /
       ABN Amro Assets, paragraph 23.
15     Case COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis, paragraph 76.
16     Parties' estimations based on "Affacturage – Activité annuelle 2015" (Annex 5b of the Form CO, confidential statistics of the
       "Association Française des Sociétés Financières").
                                                                    5

(25)  From a demand-side perspective the results of the market investigation indicate that
      companies can choose from different providers with comparable offers. Competitors
      consider that the top players on the market are BNP Paribas, Crédit Agricole and
      Société Générale.17 Customers mention an even larger number of alternative suppliers
      to which they could switch and therefore expect a limited impact on their ability to
      source leasing services from different suppliers.18 In general, market participants do
      not perceive the Parties to be particularly close competitors to each other.19
(26)  In light of the above, the proposed transaction will not lead to a significant
      impediment to effective competition in the market for factoring in France.
5.2.  Leasing
(27)  The combined market shares of the Parties for leasing services to businesses in France
      are below [20-30%] in any plausible sub-segmentation. With regards to financial
      leasing, Crédit Mutuel's market share of [10-20%] will increase by less than [0-5%].
      The effect with regards to "credit-bail" (which is a segment of financial leasing) is of
      comparable magnitude. In a hypothetical segment of operating leasing the Target
      Businesses are stronger with a market share of [10-20%]. However, Crédit Mutuel's
      share in this segment is [5-10%] so that the combined entity accounts for [10-20%]
      also in this segment.
(28)  Four large competitors that account for 10% or more each will remain in the market
      (Crédit Agricole, Société Générale, BPCE, and BNP Paribas). Together, these
      competitors represent [40-50%] of the overall market for leasing services. All of these
      banks offer all three types of leasing mentioned above.20
(29)  While there is a certain specialisation with regards to specific types of assets leased by
      specific providers, the market investigation did not unveil any segment where both
      Parties are particularly strong.21 In spite of this specialisation, all competitors
      mentioned above provide leasing for all types of assets. In addition, the Parties are not
      perceived by market participants as close competitors for leasing of any specific type
      of asset.22
(30)  While car fleet leasing could be considered as a separate market, this is not relevant
      for the present case as the Target Businesses are not active in this segment. The
      market shares provided above exclude this segment accordingly.
(31)  While both Parties overlap with regards to leasing services to businesses in Germany,
      their combined market share amounts to only [0-5%] overall. There are no indications
      for any plausible sub-segment within the German leasing market where the combined
      Parties' position could have a significant impact on competition.
17   Questionnaires on factoring, Q1 to competitors (Question 3).
18   Questionnaires on factoring, Q2 to customers (Question 12).
19   Questionnaires on factoring, Q1 to competitors (Questions 5-6) and Q2 to customers (Questions 10-11).
20   Questionnaire on leasing, Q3 to competitors (Question 2).
21   Questionnaires on leasing, Q3 to competitors (Question 4) and Q4 to customers (Question 9).
22   Questionnaires on leasing, Q3 to competitors (Questions 5-6) and Q4 to customers (Questions 10-11).
                                                                  6

(32) In light of the above, the proposed transaction will not lead to a significant
     impediment to effective competition in the market for leasing in France or Germany.
6.   CONCLUSION
(33) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
     notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
     EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
     Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                  For the Commission
                                                  (signed)
                                                  Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                  Member of the Commission
                                              7
