                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 07.07.2016
                                                                 C(2016) 4414 final
In the published version of this decision, some                             PUBLIC VERSION
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information                           MERGER PROCEDURE
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
                                                                 To the notifying party
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case M. 7947 – BANCO SANTANDER TOTTA / BANIF
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the European Economic
                Area2
(1)         On 2 June 2016, the European Commission ('the Commission') received
            notification of a proposed concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger
            Regulation by which the undertaking Banco Santander Totta, S.A. ('BST',
            Portugal), the Portuguese subsidiary of the Santander Group (Spain), acquires
            within the meaning of Article 3(1) of the Merger Regulation sole control of a set of
            assets and liabilities of Banco Internacional do Funchal, SA ('BANIF', Portugal),
            within the context of a resolution measure adopted by Banco de Portugal ('the
            Transaction').3 BST is hereafter designated as the Notifying Party and together with
            BANIF as 'the Parties', whilst the undertaking resulting from the Transaction is
            referred to as 'the merged entity'.
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
          the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
          replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
          the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2         OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
3         Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 210, 11.6.2016, p. 18.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

1.       THE PARTIES
(2)      BST is the Portuguese subsidiary of the Santander Group, an international financial
         group of companies in the banking and financial sector with activity in Spain, the
         United Kingdom, other European countries and North and South America.
(3)      BANIF's assets and liabilities transferred to BST are mainly related to the banking
         activity of BANIF in Portugal and include deposits and most of the commercial
         activity, employment contracts for all workers except those working in the Central
         Services.
2.       THE OPERATION
(4)      The implementation of the concentration was based on the resolution measure
         determined by the Resolution of the Bank of Portugal, under Article 145 – M (1)
         and (6) of the Legal Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies,
         approved by Decree-Law No. 298/92, of 31 December ('RGICSF').
(5)      According to that measure, BST acquired and took control over the rights and
         obligations, namely certain assets, liabilities, off-balance sheet items and assets
         under BANIF’s management and as a consequence is considered, for all legal and
         contractual purposes, as successor of BANIF in the rights and obligations
         concerning the assets transferred.
(6)      Most of the assets and liabilities that were not sold to BST were transferred to an
         asset management vehicle.
(7)      In view of the above, the operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning
         of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
3.       UNION DIMENSION
(8)      The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
         more than EUR 5 000 million4 (Santander Group: EUR 76 793 million; BANIF:
         EUR 277 million). Each of them has an Union-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250
         million (Santander Group: EUR […] million; BANIF: EUR 277 million). BANIF
         achieves more than two-thirds of its aggregate Union-wide turnover in Portugal,
         but the Santander Group does not. The Transaction therefore has an Union
         dimension under Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
4.       RELEVANT MARKETS
4.1.     Introduction
(9)      BST and BANIF perform a broad range of activities in the banking sector,
         including retail and corporate banking, factoring, and also offer card payment
         services The Transaction has an impact, primarily within the Portuguese territory5
4    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
     Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
5    Taking into account the minimal turnover created outside Portugal by BANIF, this will not be discussed
     further in this decision.
                                                        2

         and in particular regarding the islands of Madeira and Azores, where BANIF has
         historically held a relatively strong position.
(10)     As regards banking services, the Commission distinguished in previous decisions6
         three broad areas of activity for the purposes of product market definition:
           i. Retail Banking, which pertains to the supply of banking services to individuals
              and small businesses;
          ii. Corporate Banking, which pertains to the supply of banking services to
              companies, financial institutions and public sector; and
        iii. Investment Banking / financial market services, which includes investment
              operations in different types of assets such as stock, bonds or derivative
              financial instruments.
(11)     In addition, the Commission identified other banking or banking-related activities,
         such as for example factoring7, and (card) payment services8, which were assessed
         separately from those broad categories of activities.
(12)     Moreover, the Commission considered a variety of narrower product markets
         within these areas of activity, with the precise market definition being left open. In
         view of the fact that the Transaction gives rise only to potentially affected markets
         in retail banking and factoring, the following sections will solely focus on those
         activities.9
4.2.     Retail banking
(13)     In the area of retail banking, the Commission previously considered in particular
         potentially separate markets for current accounts, savings, personal loans,
         consumer loans, credit cards, debit cards, mortgages, the distribution of mutual
         funds and other investment products.10 In one case, a separate market was
         considered for card-based revolving credit.11 However, in all previous cases the
         precise market definitions were left open.12
6    For example M.4844 – Fortis / ABN AMRO Assets and M.6405 – Banco Santander / Rainbow.
7    M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets and M.7944 – Credit Mutuel / GE Capital's factoring and
     equipment financing business in France and Germany.
8    M.7873 – Worldline / Equens / Paysquare.
9    Further overlaps, but no affected markets also arise with respect to card payment services and corporate
     banking markets. As regards (card) payment services, the Commission has previously identified
     separate markets for payment card issuing and for merchant acquiring (see for example M.7873 –
     Worldline / Equens / Paysquare) and contemplated a number of plausible sub-segments. The
     geographic scope of these markets has always been considered to be at least national. Likewise, the
     Commission has previously considered a number of plausible sub-segments in the corporate banking
     area (M.6405 – see for example M.7873 – Banco Santander / Rainbow), but has consistently defined
     the geographic market to be national or wider.
10   M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets.
11   M.5384 - BNP Paribas/Fortis.
12   M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets.
                                                         3

(14)    In the present case, the submissions of the Notifying Party and the findings of the
        market investigation13 indicate that all banks in Portugal offer broadly the same
        types of retail banking products and services, which suggests that a certain degree
        of supply-side substitutability exists.
(15)    In any event, the Commission considers that, for the purpose of this decision, the
        exact scope of the market for retail banking, and whether narrower product markets
        can be identified within this activity, can be left open, since the Transaction does
        not give rise to serious doubts about its compatibility with the internal market
        under any plausible product market definition.
(16)    With regard to the geographic scope of the markets for retail banking, in previous
        decisions the Commission mostly assessed them at a national level, but also
        considered the existence of regional markets, or took the regional distribution of
        branches into account in its competitive assessment.14
(17)    With particular regard to the potential existence of regional markets for retail
        banking , which the Notifying Party contests, the Commission considers that there
        may be some reasons justifying the definition of regional markets, in particular for
        the insular regions of Madeira and Azores. This is because BANIF's activities are
        predominantly focused on those areas, where its position has traditionally been
        significantly stronger than in continental Portugal. On the other hand, the Parties'
        competitors indicated in the course of the market investigation15 that their pricing
        policy is national, which is a strong indication of national geographic markets.
(18)    Even if regional markets were defined for Madeira and Azores, the fact that the
        pricing policy of Portuguese banks is largely defined at a national level would be
        an important factor to take into account in the competitive assessment.
(19)    In any event, the Commission considers that it is not necessary, for the purposes of
        the this decision, to conclude on the precise geographic scope of the markets for
        retail banking, as no serious doubts arise as to the compatibility of the Transaction
        with the internal market on the basis of either a regional (for both Madeira and
        Azores) or national market definition.
4.3.    Factoring
(20)    Factoring is a financial service by which a commercial client pledges its debtors to
        a factoring company that will collect the money. Factoring comprises the purchase
        of all kinds of receivables from businesses, thereby providing customers with
        additional liquidity.16
13   M.3894 - Unicredit/HVB; M.4356 – Deutsche Bank/Berliner Bank; M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO
     Assets, COMP/M.5811 – Erste Bank/ASK, M.5960 – Credit Agricole / Cassa di Risparmio di della
     Spezia / Agences Intesa Sanpaolo, and M.6405 - Banco Santander / Rainbow.
14   M.3894 - Unicredit/HVB; M.4356 – Deutsche Bank/Berliner Bank; M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO
     Assets, COMP/M.5811 – Erste Bank/ASK M.5960 – Credit Agricole / Cassa di Risparmio di della
     Spezia / Agences Intesa Sanpaolo, and M.6405 - Banco Santander / Rainbow.
15   Minutes of conference calls held with competitors on 12 May 2016, 13 May 2016, 16 May 2016 and 19
     May 2016.
16   M.3894 - Unicredit/HVB.
                                                       4






      customers of the banking sector in Madeira.27 This is also consistent with the
      relatively higher market shares of BANIF in saving products.
(39)  In view of the above, the market shares as submitted by the Parties probably
      overestimate BANIF's importance for customers living in Madeira.
(40)  Furthermore, the Notifying Party submitted that that the products and pricing
      policy for retail banking products and services are defined at a national level by all
      banks active in Portugal, and therefore there is a sufficiently competitive banking
      environment at a national level which imposes a constraint on the behaviour of
      banks in all regions. As mentioned in paragraphs (14) and (16) above, the results of
      the market investigation support this argument. The Commission considers that,
      even if Azores and Madeira are considered separate regional markets, the capacity
      of the merged entity to leverage its locally stronger position would be to some
      extent limited by the fact that the commercial policy is mainly determined at
      national level, where the competitive constraint exercised by other banks is more
      intense.
(41)  In addition, the results of the market investigation show that, both in Madeira and
      Azores, BST and BANIF have different approaches to the market and primarily
      focus on different types of clients.28
(42)  Moreover, the results of the market investigation indicate that BANIF is a bank
      with a strong regional focus. First, it has strong relationships with the local
      government and the payments of public servants are done through it. Second, it is
      mainly focused on the public sector and construction. Third, it is also strong with
      non-corporate clients and SMEs given a traditional proximity to those clients. And
      fourth, it has a low focus on cross-selling.
(43)  Unlike BANIF, BST does not have a significant public sector activity on Madeira
      or the Azores, similarly to its policy on the continent. BST has a stricter policy for
      consumer credit, and is more focused on large corporate clients and large projects.
      Contrary to BANIF, BST has a strong focus on cross-selling.
(44)  The results of the market investigation also show that BANIF's closest competitor
      appears to be CGD which is also highly focused on the public sector and
      supporting SMEs.29
(45)  In the light of the above considerations, the Commission concludes that the Parties
      are not particularly close competitors in the market(s) for retail banking in the
      regions of Madeira and Azores.
(46)  The Notifying Party further argues that entry barriers in the banking sector are low
      and give the example of the entry of some competitors in the regions of Madeira
      and Azores, namely Banco CTT and Bankinter. The results of the market
27   Minutes of a conference call held with a competitor on 13 May 2016.
28   Minutes of conference calls held with competitors on 12 May 2016, 13 May 2016, 16 May 2016 and
     19 May 2016.
29   Minutes of conference calls held with competitors on 12 May 2016 and 13 May 2016.
                                                      10

      investigation confirm the entry of these players, although competitors do not expect
      a significant impact of these entries on the market.30
(47)  The Notifying Party has also submitted that the situation of BANIF was rapidly
      deteriorating prior to the resolution decision that led to the Transaction. During the
      Commission's investigation some competitors confirmed that they were able to
      gain some customers from BANIF in the period before the resolution decision.31
      This provides an indication that the competitive constraint exercised by BANIF
      prior to its resolution was of less significance than its historical market position
      would suggest.
(48)  Finally, in the course of the market investigation competitors stated that they do not
      expect a significant detrimental effect on competition resulting from the
      Transaction given that there are alternatives in the market. Some competitors
      explained that BANIF could even benefit from the higher capacity of BST to obtain
      liquidity in larger amounts and at lower prices, and offer more competitive terms to
      a larger base of customers.32
(49)  In light of the outcome of the market investigation and the information available to
      it, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as
      to its compatibility with the internal market with respect to the retail banking
      market(s) in the regions of Madeira and Azores.
6.    CONCLUSION
(50)  For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
      notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
      EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
      Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                           For the Commission
                                                           (Signed)
                                                           Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                           Member of the Commission
30   Minutes of conference calls held with competitors on 13 May 2016 and 19 May 2016.
31   Minutes of conference calls held with competitors on 13 May 2016 and 19 May 2016.
32   Minutes of conference calls held with competitors on 16 May 2016 and 17 May 2016,
                                                     11
