1.   THE PARTIES
(2)  Great-West Lifeco is an international financial services holding company with
     interests in life insurance, health insurance, retirement and investment services,
     asset management, and reinsurance businesses in Canada, the United States,
     Europe and Asia. Great-West Lifeco is part of the Power Corporation of Canada.
(3)  Irish Life is a provider of life insurance, pensions, retirement savings and asset
     management services in Ireland.
(4)  GloHealth is active in the provision of health insurance products to both consumer
     and business customers in Ireland. Irish Life currently holds a 49.3% stake in
     GloHealth and controls the company jointly with the founders and managers of
     GloHealth.
(5)  Aviva Health is active in the provision of health insurance products to both
     consumer and business customers in Ireland.
2.   THE OPERATION AND THE CONCENTRATION
(6)  The Proposed Concentration will be implemented by means of two Share Purchase
     Agreements ("SPAs") entered into by Irish Life on the same day, 9 March 2016.
     […] On this basis, it can be concluded that the two transactions are inter-related
     and unitary in nature.
(7)  Therefore, the Proposed Concentration consisting in the acquisition by Irish Life of
     the entire issued share capital of Aviva Health and sole control of GloHealth
     constitutes a single concentration for the purposes of Article 3 of the Merger
     Regulation.
3.   EU DIMENSION
(8)  The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
     more than EUR 5 000 million4 [Great-West Lifeco (including Irish Life): EUR
     […], Aviva Health: EUR […], GloHealth: EUR […]]. Two of the undertakings
     concerned have an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million [Great-West
     Lifeco: EUR […], Aviva Health: EUR […]]. Aviva Health and GloHealth achieve
     more than two thirds of their turnover in Ireland, but Great-West Lifeco does not.
     The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension.
4.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
(9)  The activities of GloHealth and Aviva Health overlap in the market for provision of
     health insurance to consumer and business customers in Ireland. Irish Life active in
     health insurance only through GloHealth. The transaction gives rise to a possible
     affected market for the provision of health insurance to consumer and business
     customers in Ireland, if market shares are measured by customer numbers ([20-
     30]%).
4   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation.

4.1.   Relevant product market
(10)   In previous decisions relating to the insurance sector, the Commission has
       distinguished between three large categories of insurance product markets: life
       insurance, non-life insurance and reinsurance.5 The Commission has also identified
       product markets for insurance distribution and insurance underwriting, which are
       ancillary to the provision of insurance.6
(11)   Regarding non-life insurance products, the Commission has generally considered a
       distinction between the following segments: (i) accident and sickness; (ii) motor
       vehicle; (iii) property; (iv) marine, aviation and transport ("MAT"); (v) liability; (vi)
       credit and suretyship; and (vii) travel.7
(12)   Both accident and sickness insurance as referred to in previous Commission
       decisions, and health insurance as described in the present transaction, fit within
       the same classification under the EU Non-Life Insurances Directives,8 namely:
       “Classes I and II (accident and sickness)”. The Parties submit that the Irish health
       insurance market presents distinct characteristics because it is subject to a specific
       regulatory framework (which is governed by the Health Insurance Act)9 that applies
       in addition to the regulatory framework for Classes I and II.
(13)   The Central Bank of Ireland is responsible for the approval of non-life insurance
       companies in Ireland. In order to carry out the business of health insurance in
       Ireland, under Health Insurance Act10 it is also necessary for insurers to be
       registered with the Health Insurance Authority (“HIA”), a statutory regulator of the
       private health insurance market in Ireland. Furthermore, at the level of the trade
       association of insurers, Insurance Ireland, there is a specific council for health
       insurance companies that comprises the CEOs of all four private health insurance
       companies operating in the domestic Irish market.
(14)   The existence of regulatory obligations that influence health insurance product
       design implies that the making and marketing of health insurance products is a
       specialised activity from a supply side perspective.
5    See cases M.7233 - Allianz/Going Concern of Unipolsai Assicurazioni, M.6957 - IF
     P&C/TOPDANMARK, M.6217 - Baloise Holding/Nateus/Nateus Life, M.6053 - CVC/Apollo/Brit
     Insurance, M.4284 - AXA/Winterthur.
6    See cases M.7233 - Allianz/Going Concern of Unipolsai Assicurazioni, M.6957 - IF
     P&C/TOPDANMARK, M.3035 – Berkshire Hathaway/Converium/Gaum/JV, M.6053 - CVC/ Apollo/
     Brit Insurance, M.6649 -Allianz / Insurance Portfolio And Brokerage Services Of Gan Eurocourtage.
7    See cases M.6521 - Talanx International/Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance/Warta, M.4284 -
     AXA/Winterthur; M.4701 - Generali/PPF Insurance Business.
8    Directives 73/239/EEC (First Non-Life Directive), 88/357/EEC (Second Non-Life Directive),
     Directive 92/49/EEC (Third Non-Life Directive).
9    Health Insurance Act no. 16, dated 30th June, 1994, as amended.
10   See Health Insurance Authority web page www.hia.ie and European Commission decision in State
     Aid case N 46/2003 – Ireland.

(15)   From a demand side perspective, no other insurance product is an effective
       substitute for health insurance because the latter provides a distinct type of
       insurance cover.11
(16)   Accordingly, health insurance does not compete with other types of non-life
       insurance in Ireland because it is not substitutable from a demand or supply side
       perspective.
(17)   Taking into account all of the above, it seems reasonable to treat, for the purpose of
       this case, health insurance market in Ireland as a distinct market.12 This type of
       insurance covers products whose principal purpose is to provide cover for the actual
       cost of medical services including, but not limited to, the following:
          a. Inpatient treatments received in public hospitals, voluntary hospitals, private
              hospitals and private treatment centres in Ireland.
          b. Treatments received outside of Ireland, either in the case of an accident or
              emergency or in situations where the customer has been referred overseas on
              an elective basis.
          c. Outpatient / non-hospital / day-to-day treatments received in public,
              voluntary and private hospitals and private treatment centres, including
              general practitioner services and physiotherapy services.
(18)   According to the Parties, certain health-related products offered by insurers, such
       as: (i) insurance products sometimes known as “critical illness policies” that offer
       cash payments on the occurrence of specified illnesses or accidents (e.g. “cancer
       cover” or “personal accident” cover), and (ii) services offered to manage the risks
       associated with people being unable to work due to ill health (e.g. “medical case
       management services”), fall outside the definition of a “health insurance contract”
       as described in the Health Insurance Act. These products do not provide indemnity
       cover in respect of actual charges for medical services, often they are not offered as
       stand-alone products and, as they are not interchangeable with health insurance, it
       is not unusual for individuals to hold both types of products simultaneously.
(19)   The question whether certain health-related products should be included in the
       market for health insurance, can be left open for the purpose of this case as the
       transaction does not give rise to competition concerns under any plausible market
       definition.
(20)   The Parties submit that it would be inappropriate to further segment the health
       insurance market by customer type (i.e. consumer versus corporate), as supply-side
       substitutability exists: (i) the same competitor set offers services to all customer
       types, and (ii) insurers rely on the same resources (e.g. IT systems and personnel)
       in order to service all customer types.13 The Parties further explain that the market
11   See “Competition in the Private Health Insurance Market Report”, dated January 2007, by the
     Competition and Consumer Protection Commission in Ireland.
12   The decision of the Irish Competition Authority in case M/08/013 – Hibernian / Vivas held that health
     insurance occupies a separate product market to other non-life insurance products.
13   See UK Competition Authority practice: Anticipated acquisition by AXA PPP healthcare Limited of
     the private medical insurance business of Simplyhealth Limited (2015) (ME/6531/15), Completed

       conditions in Ireland are such that a differentiation by customer type is not
       relevant: first, the regulatory regime means that every health insurance product is
       available for purchase by any customer (consumer or corporate), regardless of
       whether that product was designed for or targeted at a particular customer type;
       second, there is no example of an Irish health insurance provider that has attempted
       to specialise in servicing either consumer or corporate customers alone
       (notwithstanding the regulatory restrictions on doing so); third, the HIA’s detailed
       market analyses have not recognised separate product markets for consumer and
       corporate customers.
(21)   Taking into account all of the above, it seems reasonable to consider, for the
       purpose of this case, that health insurance market in Ireland should not be further
       segmented by customer type.
(22)   The Parties further submit that Restricted Membership Undertakings (“RMUs”),14
       which offer health insurance to their employees only and account for 4% of the
       market, are part of the health insurance market as the Parties face competition from
       RMUs for customers who are qualified to purchase their health insurance products.
       For example, an employee of the national police force is a potential customer of
       GloHealth / Aviva Health and of a RMU such that there is competition in the
       market for this business.
(23)   Although the employees of RMUs can choose from both types of insurers, this is
       not valid for all categories of customers. Customers not employed by RMUs do not
       have access to the services offered by these. As a consequence, the RMUs and the
       products they offer do not pose a competitive constraint to the Parties across the
       health insurance market. For the purpose of this case, RMUs will not be considered
       as part of the health insurance market.
4.2.   Relevant geographic market
(24)   The Parties submit that the geographic scope of the market for health insurance is
       national, which is in line with the Commission's past decisions. The Commission
       has generally considered the geographic scope of non-life insurance market and its
       various sub-segments as national,15 with the exception (i) of large commercial
       risks, such as the insurance of aerospace risks, which is most likely to be at least
       EEA-wide in scope16 and, (ii) with respect to MAT insurance,17 which are likely to
       be wider than national for large/multinational corporate customers and large risks
       respectively.
     acquisition by BUPA Finance plc of Clinovia Group Limited (2007) and British United Provident
     Association Limited and Community Hospitals Group Plc: A report on the proposed merger (2000).
     The Parties submit that the market conditions are similar in Ireland.
14   Two major Restricted Membership Undertakings are (i) the ESB Medical Provident Fund (related to
     the State-owned energy group ESB), and (ii) the Garda Medical Aid Society (related to the Irish
     national police force, AnGarda Síochána).
15   See case M.4284 - AXA/Winterthur.
16   See case M.5010 - Berkshire Hathaway/Munich RE/GAUM.
17   See cases M.2676 - Sampo/Varma Sampo/IF Holding/JV; M.4284 - AXA/Winterthur; M.1082 -
     Allianz/AGF; M.3556 - FORTIS/BCP; M.5010 - Berkshire Hathaway/ Munich RE/GAUM.

(25)   Further arguments in favour of the national scope of the market in the case at hand
       are the existence of a national regulatory framework and national central authority
       for the health insurance.18
4.3.   Competitive assessment
(26)   In line with the market definitions set out above, there is a horizontal overlap
       between the activities of Aviva Health and GloHealth in the market for provision of
       health insurance to consumer and business customers in Ireland. The Parties’
       combined share in this market is [10-20]% (Aviva Health [10-20]%, GloHealth [0-
       5]%, with an HHI delta of [>150]), based on revenue, and [20-30]% (Aviva Health
       [10-20]%; GloHealth [5-10]%, with an HHI delta of [150-250]), based on the
       number of customers.19 The HHI delta stemming from the transaction will be
       limited.
(27)   The merged entity would face strong competition from two large players: (i) the
       former monopolist Voluntary Health Insurance (“VHI”) whose 2015 market share
       is around [50-60]% (based on revenue), and (ii) Laya Healthcare whose 2015
       market share is around [10-20]% (based on revenue) and who was acquired in 2015
       by the global insurance business American International Group Inc. (“AIG”).
(28)   Laya’s market share has grown in recent years and has the potential to grow in
       strength due to the additional resources that are available from its new parent
       company, AIG.
(29)   According to the Parties, GloHealth holds an insignificant market position […].
       Aviva Health’s market share has experienced a steady decline since 2011. Both
       companies have been trailing behind the market leader VHI and second player
       Laya in recent years.
(30)   According to a 2016 customer survey (the “HIA survey”)20, the Parties focus on
       different demographic groups, with GloHealth serving relatively more young
       families. There are also differences in brand positioning and product design.
(31)   According to the HIA survey, 24% of the customers have switched their health
       insurer at some stage in the past. This trend has increased since 2013. The main
       reason for switching is cost and secondly, improved levels of cover. Nevertheless,
       among those that have never switched, there is a strong loyalty.21
(32)   The market investigation indicated that currently the Parties are indeed number
       three and four in the Irish health insurance market, where historical incumbent VHI
18   See Health Insurance Authority web page www hia.ie, European Commission decision in State Aid
     case N 46/2003 – Ireland.
19   These market shares include sales of the Parties' health insurance products made through brokers.
     Also, if RMUs were considered as part of the market, the Parties’ combined share would be [10-20]%
     (based on revenue) or [10-20]% (based on customer number).
20   See HIA Survey 2016, slide 21, dependent children percentage is higher for GloHealth and Laya in
     comparison with Aviva and VHI.
21   See HIA Survey 2016, slides 6 and 37 about “Switching and Discontinuation”. In 2007 the
     Competition and Consumer Protection Commission in Ireland described the process of switching as
     simple and straightforward, with some consumers that had an incorrect perception that the process
     was difficult and cumbersome.

       holds a strong position. Neither Party has been particularly successful, in terms of
       market penetration and profitability, in recent years, in part due to the impact of
       fixed costs on their operations. The market shares of the merged entity will remain
       limited, giving rise to an affected market only by customers numbers (combined
       share [20-30]%, with an HHI delta of [150-250]), but not by revenues (combined
       share [10-20]%, HHI delta of [>150]).
(33)   If health-related products as described in paragraph (16) were included in the health
       insurance market, the Parties’ combined market share would remain below 20%
       both in terms of revenues and of customer numbers, as neither Aviva Health nor
       GloHealth offer health-related products.
(34)   The transaction does not give rise to vertically affected markets.22
(35)   Taking into account the specificities of the Irish health insurance market, the
       Parties' combined low market shares,23 the limited overlap and the presence of
       strong players in this market, no competition concerns arise as to the compatibility
       of the proposed Transaction with the internal market.
5.     CONCLUSION
(36)   For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
       notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
       EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
       Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                            For the Commission
                                                            (Signed)
                                                            Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                            Member of the Commission
22   Although Great-West Lifeco is active in reinsurance, it does not provide reinsurance services to any
     health insurance provider in Ireland. Also, the Parties submit that they are not active in insurance
     distribution, but, if we were to consider the direct means of sale as part of the insurance distribution
     market, the Parties' market shares would remain under 30%.
23   The transaction gives rise to an affected market only if market shares are measured by customers'
     number.
