                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                Brussels, 10.08.2016
                                                                C(2016) 5309 final
    In the published version of this decision, some                      PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                 MERGER PROCEDURE
    other confidential information. The omissions are
    shown thus […]. Where possible the information
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
    general description.
                                                                To the notifying parties
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case M.8073 - ADVENT INTERNATIONAL / BAIN CAPITAL / SETEFI
                SERVICES / INTESA SANPAOLO CARD
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the European Economic
                Area2
(1)         On 5 July 2016, the Commission received notification of a proposed concentration
            pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by which funds
            managed by Advent International Corporation (“Advent International”, USA) and
            funds managed by Bain Capital Investors, L.L.C. (“Bain Capital”, USA), acquire
            within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint control of
            Setefi Services S.p.A. (“Setefi Services”, Italy) and Intesa Sanpaolo Card d.o.o.
            (“ISP Card”, Croatia), by way of purchase of shares. Advent International and Bain
            Capital are collectively referred to as the Notifying Parties, Setefi Services and ISP
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
          the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
          replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
          the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2         OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

      Card are collectively referred to as ISP Processing and all four are collectively
      referred to as the Parties.
1.    THE PARTIES
(2)   Advent International is a private equity investor with holdings through its funds in
      various sectors, including industrial, retail, media, communications, information
      technology, internet, healthcare and pharmaceuticals
(3)   Bain Capital is a private equity investment firm investing in information
      technology, healthcare, retail and consumer products, communications, financial
      and industrial/manufacturing.
(4)   Setefi Services and Intesa Sanpaolo Card operate primarily as the in-house card
      payment processing platform of the Intesa Sanpaolo Banking Group (“ISP”), with
      negligble sales to third parties.
2.    THE OPERATION
(5)   The Transaction involves the acquisition, by funds managed by each of Advent
      International and Bain Capital, of joint control over ISP Processing. This will be
      done through the same corporate structure, Mercury UK Holdco Limited (“UK
      Holdco”) which has already been assessed by the Commission to be jointly
      controlled by Advent International and Bain Capital.3
      On Joint control
(6)   On April 29, 2016, Bidco, a wholly owned subsidiary of UK Holdco (as Bidco’s
      guarantor), and ISP (as seller) entered into a Sale and Purchase Agreement,
      pursuant to which Bidco intends to acquire 100% of the share capital of ISP
      Processing. Advent International and Bain Capital each indirectly hold
      approximately 42.5% of the share capital of UK Holdco and Bidco.
(7)   Pursuant to an Investment and Shareholders’ Agreement the Notifying Parties have
      the right to appoint between them the majority of the members of the board of
      directors of UK Holdco. This board is comprised of six directors, two of which are
      appointed by Advent International and two of which are appointed by Bain Capital.
      Of the two remaining directors, one is appointed by Clessidra, an Italian private
      equity fund, and the other by mutual agreement between the directors appointed by
      Advent International, Bain Capital and Clessidra. For a decision of the board to be
      valid, a simple majority of directors is necessary, which must include at least one
      director appointed by each of Advent International and Bain Capital (excluding the
      executive director). The consent of each of the Notifying Parties is therefore
      required for all resolutions, thereby giving each Notifying Party a veto over all
      matters, including those relating to the strategic commercial behaviour of ISP
      Processing, the appointment of senior management, and the adoption of the budget
      and business plan.4 The minority shareholders will have no control rights.
3   Case COMP/M.7711 – Advent International/Bain Capital/ICBPI, para 8-9.
4   Moreover, the Notifying Parties have agreed that them will always vote together on board resolutions
    and, if they do not agree to vote in favour, will vote against the resolution.
                                                        2

      Consequently, the Notifying Parties have joint control within the meaning of
      Article 3(1)(b) of the EU Merger Regulation.
(8)   The Transaction therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article
      3(1)(b) of the EU Merger Regulation.
3.    EU DIMENSION
(9)   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
      more than EUR 5 000 million5 (Advent International EUR […] million, Bain
      Capital EUR […] million, ISP Processing EUR […] million). Two of them have an
      EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (Advent International EUR […]
      million and Bain Capital EUR […] million). The undertakings concerned do not
      achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and
      the same Member State.
(10)  The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of
      the Merger Regulation
4.    RELEVANT MARKETS
4.1.  The Parties' business activities
(11)  ISP Processing is active only in payment card processing services (i.e., technical
      services for processing payment card transactions, both on the issuing and
      acquiring side) – which it provides on an almost exclusively captive basis to ISP
      primarily in Italy, as well as in other countries where ISP operates (Croatia,
      Hungary, Slovakia, Slovenia and Romania). ISP Processing sales to third parties
      are negligible.6
(12)  The Notifying Parties jointly control Istituto Centrale Delle Banche Popolari
      Italiane (“ICBPI”, Italy) which is active through its CartaSi business in card issuing
      and merchant acquiring only in Italy and San Marino. ICBPI does not offer
      payment card processing services, but instead obtains these services from third
      parties (principally from […]).
(13)  The Notifying Parties also jointly control Nets A/S (“Nets”, Denmark) which
      provides payment, card, and information services primarily in the Nordic and
      Baltic countries. Nets has only negligible sales outside these countries and does not
      offer card processing services (issuer processing or acquirer processing) in any of
      the countries in which ISP Processing is active.
(14)  Finally, Advent International solely controls Oberthur Technologies (“Oberthur”,
      France, which supplies payment cards (generally in conjunction with card
      personalisation services) and trusted service manager services.
(15)  Both the Notifying Parties and ISP Processing are active in the provision of card
      processing services, and the Notifying Parties are also active in card issuing and
5    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
     Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
6    Amounting to less than [0-5] % of the transactions processed by ISP Processing.
                                                      3

         merchant acquiring, which are downstream of the provision of card processing
         services
4.2.     Relevant Product Market
4.2.1.   Card issuing
(16)     The Commission has previously identified a separate product market for card
         issuing, distinct from merchant acquiring and card processing.7
(17)     The Commission has further considered whether card issuing could be further
         segmented along the following lines: (i) Debit vs. credit/charge card issuing; (ii)
         Universal/hybrid store credit cards vs. special purpose credit card issuing; and (iii)
         Personal vs. corporate card issuing.8 The Notifying Parties provided market share
         data for all of the above segmentations, submitting that the exact scope of the
         market can be left open.
(18)     For the present case, the exact product market definitions for merchant acquiring
         can in any event be left open as the Transaction raises no competition issues under
         any scenario.
4.2.2.   Merchant acquiring
(19)     The Commission has previously considered that the market for merchant acquiring
         consists of the activity of contracting merchants for payment card acceptance and
         the provision of the respective services.9
(20)     The Commission has also considered the possible sub-segments: (i) by payment
         card schemes (domestic/international), (ii) by payment card brands (e.g. Visa, Visa
         Electron, MasterCard, Maestro), (iii) by the type of payment card (credit/debit) and
         (iv) by platform, distinguishing physical point of sale ("POS") terminals and web-
         enabled interfaces (e-commerce). 10 The Notifying Parties provided market share
         data for all of the above segmentations, submitting that the exact scope of the
         market can be left open.
7      See Case COMP/M.5241 – American Express/Fortis/Alpha Card, Commission decision dated
       October 3, 2008 (“Alpha Card”), paragraph 24; Case COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas/Fortis,
       Commission decision dated December 3, 2008 (“Fortis”), paragraph 14; Case COMP/M.6164 –
       Barclays Bank/ Egg credit card assets, Commission decision dated April 18, 2011 (“Egg”), paragraph
       9; Case COMP/M.7078 – Santander Consumer Finance, El Corte Ingles, Financiera El Corte Inglés,
       Commission decision dated January 29, 2014 (“Financiera El Corte Inglés”), paragraph 23; Case
       COMP/M.7711 – Advent International/Bain Capital/ICBPI, Commission decision dated September
       16, 2015 (“ICBPI”), paragraph 20.
8      See Alpha Card, paragraphs 24-27; Fortis, paragraphs 16-40; Egg, paragraphs 9-12; Financiera El
       Corte Inglés, paragraphs 22-33; ICBPI, paragraph 20.
9      See Case M.3740 – Barclays Bank/Föreningssparbanken/JV, Commission decision dated June 2,
       2005, paragraph. 11; Case COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets, Commission decision dated
       October 3, 2007, paragraph 42; Alpha Card, paragraph 23; Nets, paragraph 21; ICBPI, paragraph 14.
10     See BCC, paragraphs 19-23; AIB/FDC, paragraph 13; WorldPay, paragraph 12; Case COMP M.6956
       – Telefonica/Caixa Bank/Banco Santander/JV, Commission decision dated August 14, 2013
       (“Telefonica/Caixa Bank/Banco Santander”), paragraph 46; Case COMP/M.6967 – BNP Paribas
       Fortis/Belgacom/Belgian Mobile Wallet, Commission decision dated October 11, 2013 (“Belgian
       Mobile Wallet”), paragraph 106; Nets, paragraph 21; ICBPI, paragraph 14.
                                                       4

(21)     For the present case, the exact product market definitions for merchant acquiring
         can in any event be left open as the Transaction raises no competition issues under
         any scenario.
4.2.3.   Payment card processing
(22)     The Commission has previously considered that the market for payment card
         processing may be further subdivided into acquiring processing and issuing
         processing.11
(23)     Acquiring processing is the merchant oriented side of processing a transaction. It
         includes network routing of payments towards the corresponding issuing entity and
         the POS authorisation.
(24)     Issuing processing is the issuer oriented side of processing a card transaction. It
         includes the financial and technical requests for payment authorization from the
         issuing entity, maintenance of local and international blocking lists, verification of
         card limits, management of card accounts, generation of cardholder statements and
         invoicing.
(25)     In the past, the Commission has identified a further sub-segmentation in acquiring
         processing based on (i) the payment card scheme (national/international) and (ii)
         the platform, distinguishing between physical POS terminals and through web-
         enabled interfaces (e-commerce).12
(26)     The Notifying Parties provided market share data for all of the above
         segmentations, submitting that a sub-segmentation of the acquiring processing
         market is not necessary in the present case.
(27)     For the present case, the exact product market definitions for payment card
         processing can in any event be left open as the Transaction raises no competition
         issues under any scenario.
4.3.     Relevant geographic markets
4.3.1.   Card issuing
(28)     The Commission has previously found that card issuing (and any segment therein)
         is national in scope.13 The Notifying Parties submit that the exact scope of the
         geographic market for card issuing can ultimately be left open in this instance, as
         the Transaction does not give rise to concerns.
11     See Case COMP/M.4316 – Atos Origin/Banksys/BCC, Commission decision dated September 29,
       2006 (“BCC”), paragraph 17; Case COMP/M.4814 – AIB/FDC/JV, Commission decision dated
       January 11, 2008 (“AIB/FDC”), paragraph 15; Case COMP/M.5968 – Advent/Bain Capital/RBS
       WorldPay, Commission decision dated October 14, 2010 (“WorldPay”), paragraph 12; Case
       COMP/M.7241 – Advent International/Bain Capital/Nets Holding, Commission decision dated July
       8, 2014 (“Nets”), paragraph 33.
12     COMP/M.7241 – Advent International / Bain Capital Investors / Nets Holding, para 36.
13     See Financiera El Corte Inglés, paragraphs 49-51; Alpha Card, paragraphs 26-27; Fortis, paragraph
       73; Egg, paragraph 17; ICBPI, paragraph 31.
                                                      5

(29)    For the present case, the exact geographic market definitions for merchant
        acquiring can in any event be left open as the Transaction raises no competition
        issues under any scenario.
4.3.2.  Merchant acquiring
(30)    In recent decisions,14 the Commission confirmed its previous finding that the
        geographic market for merchant acquiring through physical terminals is most likely
        national in scope, while for web-enabled transactions the market is at least EEA
        wide.
(31)    The Notifying Parties consider that the precise definition of the relevant geographic
        market may be left open because ICBPI supplies card issuing and merchant
        acquiring services only in Italy and San Marino, and even on the narrowest basis
        (i.e., in Italy), the Transaction will not give rise to concerns.
(32)    For the present case, the exact geographic market definitions for merchant
        acquiring can in any event be left open as the Transaction raises no competition
        issues under any scenario.
4.3.3.  Payment card processing
(33)    The Notifying Parties note that the Commission has previously left open the
        question whether the provision of payment card processing services is national or
        EEA-wide in scope, although it has previously assessed these services on the basis
        of national markets, with the exception of acquirer processing for web-enabled
        transactions which the Commission has previously indicated may be EEA-wide.15
(34)    The Notifying Parties argue that payment card processing is at least EEA-wide,
        since processing services can be provided from data centres located in a Member
        States other than the one in which the customer is located; processing is primarily
        an IT service provided over an Internet connection from a data centre that may be
        located anywhere, so it is not essential to have a local presence or local service
        staff; processing services are largely standardised across Member States, since
        processing requirements are identical across Member States, with no notable
        differences between international schemes (such as Visa, or MasterCard/Maestro)
        and domestic debit schemes.
(35)    Moreover, there is an ever increasing emergence of pan-European processing
        providers that provide services to customers across borders. For example, Equens
        Worldline, Nets, TSYS, First Data, SIX and SIA are all active across multiple
        Member States. Similarly, major issuers and acquirers (e.g., WorldPay,
        Barclaycard, Crédit Agricole, Lloyds Bank, RBS, Crédit Mutuel, Swedbank)
        provide their own processing services centrally in-house, irrespective of the
        country in which the card payment occurs. Finally the Payment Services Directive
        contains “passporting” provisions that enable processors to provide services on a
14     COMP/M.7241 – Advent International / Bain Capital Investors / Nets Holding (para 23 et seq for
       merchant acquiring and para 37 for acquiring processing), COMP/M.7873 –
       Worldline/Equens/Paysquare.
15     See BCC, paragraphs 26-27; AIB/FDC, paragraph 20; WorldPay, paragraph 12; Nets, paragraphs 37-
       41.
                                                    6

       pan-EU basis once they are authorised in one Member State. Regulatory
       requirements therefore are aimed to facilitate rather than hinder cross-border
       provision of services. This last development has led to a wave of consolidation
       which currently characterises the European processing sector, in many cases driven
       by a desire to expand cross-border in order to permit suppliers to offer substantially
       the same processing services across more countries from fewer data centres.
(36)   In any event, the exact geographic market definition can still be left open for the
       purpose of the present case since no competition concerns arise as a result of the
       proposed transaction under any plausible product and geographic market definition.
5.     COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
(37)   To date, ISP Processing can be considered as an in-house supplier and provides
       services almost exclusively to ISP in the countries where the bank operates. After
       the transaction, ISP Processing will become a stand-alone, non-captive supplier of
       processing services to ISP.
(38)   This structural change will give rise to a horizontal overlap in the provision of
       processing services, and to two vertical overlaps between processing services
       upstream (ISP Processing) on the one hand, and card issuing and merchant
       acquiring downstream (ICBPI). No horizontally, vertically or neighbouring
       affected markets result in relation to Oberthur, regarding its card manufacturing
       activities.
5.1.   Non-Coordinated Horizontal Effects
(39)   Regarding the horizontal relationship in processing services, no overlap would
       arise at national level, as ISP Processing is active in Italy, Croatia, Hungary,
       Slovakia, Slovenia and Romania; while Nets operates in the Nordic and Baltic
       countries.
(40)   At EEA-wide level, no affected market would arise, with combined market shares
       post-transaction for issuing processing around [10-20]% ([10-20]% for Nets and
       [0-5]% for ISP Processing) and for acquiring processing around [10-20]% ([10-
       20]% for Nets and [0-5]% for ISP Processing).16 The Notifying Parties submit that
       they would also account for less than 20% combined EEA-wide under any possible
       further sub-segmentation (i.e., for acquirer processing, by card scheme or by
       transaction type).
(41)   Therefore, the Transaction is unlikely to give rise to non-coordinated horizontal
       effects.
5.2.   Non-Coordinated Vertical Effects
(42)   Concerning the vertical relationship between issuing processing and card issuing,
       the Transaction would give raise to an affected market only in Italy. Upstream, the
       market share of ISP Processing for issuing processing in Italy would be below [10-
       20]% both in volume and in value. Downstream, the market shares of ICBPI in the
16   These estimates are based on transaction volume. The Notifying Parties estimate that combined
     shares also would be less than 20% by value, although they are unable to provide specific estimates
     by value because reliable data are not available.
                                                       7

         overall card issuing market would also be around [10-20]%, but as high as [30-
         40]% (volume) and [60-70]% (value) for credit/charge cards and to [40-50]%
         (volume) and [60-70 ]% (value) for universal17 credit/charge cards.
(43)     Concerning the vertical relationship between acquiring processing and merchant
         acquiring, the Transaction would give raise to an affected market only in Italy.
         Upstream, the market shares of ISP Processing for acquiring processing in Italy
         would be below [20-30]% both in volume and value. Downstream, the market
         share of ICBPI in the overall merchant acquiring market is [20-30]% in value,
         reaching [30-40]% for POS merchants and to [50-60]% for merchants accepting
         international payment cards.18
5.2.1.   Input foreclosure
(44)     For both vertical relationships, a possible input foreclosure strategy would require
         ISP Processing to stop providing issuing and acquiring processing services to ISP
         (its only customer). The Notifying Parties argue that they have neither the
         incentive, nor the ability to engage in such an activity. Regarding the incentive,
         such strategy would require ISP Processing to lose their unique customer, putting at
         risk its economic survival. As for the ability, ISP could easily resort to alternative
         suppliers, in particular SIA and Equens Worldline, which have significant market
         shares of [50-60]% - [60-70]% and [30-40]% - [40-50]% respectively on the Italian
         market and are not capacity constrained.
(45)     The market investigation has confirmed the arguments of the Notifying Parties. In
         particular, it should be noted that ISP as a seller of ISP Processing is fully aware of
         the details of the Transaction and must have considered that its commercial
         interests are not at risk when agreeing to it.
(46)     In light of the above, no input foreclosure is likely to arise as a result of the
         Transaction.
5.2.2.   Customer foreclosure
(47)     Turning to a potential customer foreclosure in card issuing or merchant acquiring,
         the Notifying Parties might adopt a post-transaction strategy aimed at favouring
         ISP Processing as supplier of issuing processing services to the downstream card
         issuing business and merchant acquiring business, by switching ICBPI's contracts
         for payments' processing from its current suppliers of such services ([…]), to ISP
         Processing, and thereby undermine these rival suppliers.
(48)     The Notifying Parties argue that they have neither the ability, not the incentive to
         engage in such a conduct.
(49)     First, they argue that ISP Processing is a customised in-house system dedicated to
         serving ISP only and is not designed to process a large volume of transactions from
         multiple bank customers. Also it does not have its own data centre, but instead
         operates a processing platform on mainframes belonging to, sited at, and hosted by,
17     ICBPI does not issue specific credit / charge cards.
18     As opposed to cards which are accepted only within Italy, a segment in which ICBPI is virtually not
       active.
                                                         8

       ISP. A redesign of the whole system, allowing an eventual migration of ICBPI's
       demand to ISP Processing would be extremely onerous and could take around five
       years. Consequently, even a partial migration of ICBPI's card processing business
       from […] seems highly unlikely.
(50)   Moreover, the Notifying Parties submit that ICBPI does not represent a substantial
       part of the overall demand in Italy for processing services ([10-20]% for card
       issuing and [20-30]% for merchant acquiring). Therefore, they argue that even if
       ICBPI would theoretically switch all of its processing to ISP Processing there
       would remain a sufficiently large customer base available to its other providers of
       processing services ([…]).
(51)   The Notifying Parties note that both […] are international payments processing
       service providers present across the EEA. In an EEA-wide market ICBPI's market
       shares in card issuing and merchant acquiring are below [0-5]%, which leads to the
       conclusion that […] would be able to continue to operate as card processors in the
       EEA effectively, even if ICBPI were to migrate the entirety of its card processing
       business to ISP Processing.
(52)   The market investigation carried out by the Commission indicated that no customer
       foreclosure is likely to occur for card issuing or merchant acquiring. Indeed, the
       investigation confirmed that the market share of ICBPI in either card issuing or
       merchant acquiring is not sufficiently large to make a potential foreclosure strategy
       successful. The fact that ICBPI's market shares are higher in some plausible
       narrower markets within card issuing and merchant acquiring does not make the
       foreclosure strategy more likely. This is because processing services are largely
       homogenous between e.g. debit and credit cards and competing providers can offer
       their processing services to all merchant acquirers, largely irrespective of their
       specialisation.
(53)   Importantly, the market investigation did not evidence any concerns from market
       participants as regards a possible customer foreclosure strategy.
(54)   Therefore, no customer foreclosure is likely to arise as a result of the Transaction.
5.2.3. Conclusion
(55)   In light of the above, the transaction is unlikely to give rise to serious doubts as to
       the compatibility of the Transaction with the internal market.
6.     CONCLUSION
(56)   For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
       notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
       EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
       Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                 9

   For the Commission
   (Signed)
   Violeta BULC
   Member of the Commission
10
