                       COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                            Brussels, 07.10.1996
                                                                     PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                  MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                               ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                            To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M.823 - John Deere Capital Corp./Lombard North Central plc
             Notification of 05.09.1996 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 5 September 1996 John Deere Capital Corporation (USA) (JD Capital) and Lombard
       North Central plc (United Kingdom) (Lombard) notified to the Commission an intended
       operation whereby they acquire within the meaning of article 3(1)(b) of Council
       Regulation 4064/89 joint control of John Deere Credit Ltd (United Kingdom) (JD Credit).
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of application of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and
       does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with
       the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES
3.     JD Capital is an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Deere & Co (USA). Deere is
       involved in the manufacture and distribution of agricultural, industrial and other
       equipment and in the supply of credit and insurance. JD Capital is the holding company
       of companies which provide agricultural financing in the USA, Canada and Mexico.
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Brussels - Belgium
Telephone: exchange (+32-2)299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877 - Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels

4.  Lombard is a wholly owned subsidiary of National Westminster Bank plc (United
    Kingdom) (National Westminster). Its principal activities are the acceptance of deposits
    from the public and the provision of banking and financial services, including instalment
    credit, leasing and loans. The National Westminster Bank group (the NatWest group)
    supplies banking, financial and related activities.
II. THE OPERATION
    Introduction
5.  JD Credit is at present an inactive subsidiary of Lombard, re-named for the purposes of
    this operation. Following the operation it will be engaged in the supply of financing for
    the lease, hire and purchase of agricultural and related machinery, equipment and
    supplies in the United Kingdom.
    Joint control
6.  JD Capital will acquire 49.9 per cent of the shares in JD Credit and will have the right
    to nominate three of its seven directors. But its strategic, commercial and competitive
    activities will be subject to the unanimous consent of both JD Capital and Lombard. By
    the joint venture agreement the unanimous agreement of JD Capital and Lombard (not
    to be unreasonably withheld or delayed(1)) is required for capital expenditure above [ ](2),
    entry into a joint venture, contracts exceeding [ ](3) years, involving a liability above [ ](2)
    or outside the normal course of business of JD Credit, the appointment of the managing
    director, the adoption of or any amendment to the business plan or budget, borrowings
    exceeding a debt to equity ratio [ ](2), any change in the nature of the business, mergers,
    acquisitions and disposals.
    JD Credit will therefore be subject to joint control by JD Capital and Lombard.
    Autonomous long-lasting economic entity
7.  JD Credit will perform all the functions normally carried out by other entities operating
    in the same market. Its business has until now been operated by Farming and
    Agricultural Finance Ltd (United Kingdom) (FAF), a subsidiary of Lombard. JD Capital
    and Lombard will commit sufficient resources (including tangible and intangible assets
    and personnel) to JD Credit, generally on an arm's-length basis and with the option for
    JD Credit to obtain the resources from alternative sources.
8.  JD Credit will not be dependent upon its parents for its business. The notifying parties
    estimate that by the end of 1996 [ ](4) per cent of the business of JD Credit will involve
    non-Deere products.
9.  The joint venture agreement provides that the joint venture will have indefinite duration,
    subject to the right of either parent to withdraw by giving one year's notice three years
    after its commencement.
(1)
    In the event of ultimate disagreement the joint venture terminates
(2)
    Deleted for publication - a relatively low threshold for the industry.
(3)
    Deleted for publication - less than 5.
(4)
    Deleted for publication - a significant proportion.
                                                    -2-

10. JD Credit will therefore perform on a lasting basis all the functions of an autonomous
     economic entity.
     Absence of coordination
11. Although the NatWest group will retain activities in the same market as JD Credit (eg
     FAF will finance non-Deere agricultural equipment), Deere has no other financing
     operations in the EEA. Deere's other activities in the EEA, the manufacture of
     agricultural and other machinery, do not overlap with any activity of the NatWest group.
12. There is thus no possibility of coordination between JD Capital and Lombard or between
     companies in their corporate groups arising from the joint venture.
     Conclusion
13. The operation accordingly constitutes a concentration within the meaning of article
     3(1)(b) of the Regulation.
III. CONCENTRATION OF COMMUNITY DIMENSION
14. Deere and National Westminster have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover in
     excess of 5000 million ECU. Each of them has a Community-wide turnover in excess
     of 250 million ECU. [ ](5)
15. The operation therefore has a Community dimension within the meaning of article 1(1)
     of the Regulation. It does not qualify under the EEA Agreement for cooperation with the
     EFTA Surveillance Authority.
IV. COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
16. The operation combines complementary activities of Deere and the NatWest group. There
     is thus no overlap between their activities and the operation results in no horizontal
     increase in market shares.
17. The relevant product market in which JD Credit will be active can be defined as the
     provision of financing leasing for agricultural machinery, equipment and supplies and
     related equipment and machinery. JD Credit will have less than [ ](6) per cent of this
     market in the United Kingdom The combined market share of FAF and JD Credit will
     also be below [ ](6) per cent. On a narrower definition of the relevant product market -
     financing leasing for agricultural machinery and equipment - JD Credit will have a
     market share of [ ](6) per cent and FAF and JD Credit will have a combined share below
     25 per cent. JD Credit will be in competition with a variety of large and well established
     competitors, including similar financing joint ventures or collaborations between financial
     institutions and suppliers of agricultural machinery and equipment, such as ING
     Bank/Case, Barclays/Fiat New Holland and Rabobank/Massey Ferguson. In addition
     barriers to entry are low.
(5)
     Deleted for publication - the parties do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-
     wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
(6)
     Deleted for publication - below 10.
                                                    -3-

V.  ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
18. The notifying parties have requested that certain provisions of the agreement, if
    restrictions, be considered as ancillary to the concentration.
19. The parties agree to use all reasonable efforts to keep confidential concerning the
    business of JD Credit and the business of each other for a period ending [ ](7) years after
    the termination of the joint venture ([ ](8) years for certain Deere customer lists).
20. Subject to existing activities the parties agree not to compete with [ ](9) or solicit
    customers of JD Credit for the duration of the joint venture. This restriction, which
    reflects the substantial withdrawal of the parties from the market of the joint venture,
    does not apply to the NatWest group except Lombard and its subsidiaries.
21. Deere grants to JD Credit a non-exclusive license to certain trade and service marks for
    the duration of the joint venture
22. In accordance with customary practice in the agricultural machinery and equipment
    market Deere agrees for the duration of the joint venture to provide exclusively to JD
    Credit subsidies intended to enable it to offer attractive financing terms to prospective
    purchasers. If JD Credit decides not to provide financing for a Deere product Deere will
    be able to provide the subsidy to another finance company.
23. The parties will supply equipment and staff to JD Credit on a non-exclusive arm's-length
    basis. JD Credit will be able to obtain these resources elsewhere.
24. The provisions set out in paragraphs 19 and 23 contain no restrictions. The other
    provisions contain restrictions which are necessary to guarantee the viability of JD Credit
    or are otherwise directly related to and necessary for the successful implementation of
    the concentration and can therefore be treated as ancillary to it.
VI. CONCLUSION
25. For the foregoing reasons, the proposed concentration does not raise serious doubts as
    to its compatibility with the common market and with the functioning of the EEA
    Agreement.
                                                 *
                                                * *
26. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the
    EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                        For the Commission
(7)
    Deleted for publication - not exceeding 5.
(8)
    Deleted for publication - not exceeding 10.
(9)
    Deleted for publication.
                                                -4-
