                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                              Brussels, 19.12.2017
                                                              C(2017) 9054 final
    In the published version of this decision, some                  PUBLIC VERSION
    information has been omitted pursuant to Article
    17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
    concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
    other confidential information. The omissions are
    shown thus […]. Where possible the information
    omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
    general description.
                                                              To the notifying party:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Subject:        Case M.8287 – NORDIC CAPITAL / INTRUM JUSTITIA
                Approval of Pofidax Oy (part of the Lowell Group) as purchaser of
                Lindorff's CMS1 and debt purchasing businesses in Sweden, Finland,
                Denmark and Estonia, and of Intrum Justitia's CMS and debt
                purchasing businesses in Norway, following your letter of 9 November
                2017 and the Trustee’s opinion of 16 November 2017
I.      FACTS AND PROCEDURE
1.      By decision of 12 June 2017 (“the Decision”) based on Article 6(1)(b) in
        connection with Article 6(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 of 20
        January 2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings (the “Merger
        Regulation”), the Commission declared the operation by which Nordic Capital
        Fund VIII Limited (“Nordic Capital”) acquired control of the whole of Intrum
        Justitia AB (“Intrum Justitia”) by way of purchase of shares (“the Transaction”),
        combining the operations of Intrum Justitia with those of Nordic Capital's portfolio
        company Lindorff, compatible with the internal market following modification by
        Nordic Capital and Intrum Justitia, subject to conditions and obligations (the
        “Commitments”). Nordic Capital and Intrum Justitia are referred to as “the
        Parties”.
1    Credit management services, including debt collection.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu

2.  In particular, the Commitments provide that Nordic Capital will divest Lindorff's
    credit management services (“CMS”, including debt collection) and debt
    purchasing businesses in Sweden, Finland, Denmark and Estonia, and Intrum
    Justitia's CMS (including debt collection) and debt purchasing businesses in
    Norway (together, “the Divestment Business”).
3.  By letter of 9 November 2017, the Parties proposed Pofidax Oy, part of the Lowell
    Group, for approval by the Commission as purchaser of the Divestment Business
    and submitted the proposed Sale and Purchase Agreement and related agreements
    (the “Proposed Agreement”).
4.  On 16 November 2017, Grant Thornton UK LLP (the “Trustee”) submitted an
    assessment of Lowell Group’s suitability as a purchaser and, in particular, indicated
    that Lowell Group fulfils the criteria of the purchaser requirements set out in
    Section D of the Commitments attached to the Decision. In this assessment, the
    Trustee also indicated that, on the basis of the Proposed Agreement, the Divestment
    Business would be sold in a manner consistent with the Commitments.
II. ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPOSAL
5.  As set out in Section D of the Commitments, in order to be approved by the
    Commission, the purchaser(s) of the Divestment Businesses must fulfil the
    following criteria:
        a) the purchaser(s) shall be independent of and unconnected to the Parties and
             their affiliated undertakings (this being assessed having regard to the
             situation following the divestiture);
        b) the purchaser(s) shall have the financial resources, proven expertise and
             incentive to maintain and develop the Divestment Businesses as viable and
             active competitive forces in competition with the Parties and other
             competitors;
        c) the acquisition of the Divestment Businesses by the purchaser(s) must
             neither be likely to create, in light of the information available to the
             Commission, prima facie competition concerns nor give rise to a risk that
             the implementation of the Commitments will be delayed. In particular, the
             purchaser(s) must reasonably be expected to obtain all necessary approvals
             from the relevant regulatory authorities for the acquisition of the
             Divestment Businesses.
6.  This section provides a short description of the purchaser and an assessment of its
    suitability in view of these criteria.
    (a)    Description of the purchaser
7.  Lowell Group, headquartered in the UK, is a leading pan-European CMS provider
    which mainly operates in the UK and in Germany, Austria and Switzerland (the
    “DACH region”). Lowell Group is active in both debt collection and debt
    purchasing, and has a particular focus on non-performing and unsecured consumer
    debt portfolios. It also specialises in data analytics and customer insight, and has
                                                2

      built its brand around innovation, a data-based approach to debt collection and
      customer care.
8.    Lowell Group was founded in 2004. It has existed under its current structure since
      2015, following the merger of the German GFKL Group and the UK-based Lowell
      Group.2 Lowell Group currently has over 2 500 employees. Its EEA turnover
      amounted to GBP 454 million in 2016.
9.    The legal entity acquiring the Divestment Business is Pofidax Oy, a company
      incorporated under the laws of Finland and wholly-owned by Lowell Group.
      (b)    Independence from the Parties
10.   Lowell Group is jointly controlled by Permira Funds (“Permira”), which holds 40%
      of shares, and the Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan (“OTPP”), which holds 35% of
      shares. Permira is a private equity company with portfolio companies active in a
      variety of sectors. OTPP is a corporation without share capital responsible for the
      administration of pension benefits and investments of pension fund assets on behalf
      of teachers in Canada. The non-controlling shareholders of Lowell Group are
      management (15% of shares), the Government of Singapore Investment
      Corporation (“GIC”, 5% of shares), and the National Pension Service of Korea
      (“NPS”, 5% of shares).
11.   There are no meaningful links between Lowell Group and the Parties at shareholder
      or directorship level. Neither Lowell Group nor its shareholders holds any
      meaningful shares in Nordic Capital and Intrum Justitia (or companies controlled
      by either) and they do not enjoy veto rights granting them control over Nordic
      Capital or Intrum Justitia. The Parties do not have any shareholdings in Lowell
      Group or its subsidiary companies. The Parties have no directors in common with
      Lowell Group.
12.   There are no meaningful commercial relationships between the Parties (and their
      affiliates) and Lowell Group. A number of Permira and OTPP's other portfolio
      companies could be potential customers of the Parties for CMS services or debt
      portfolios sales. As concluded in the Decision, CMS are not, however, an essential
      input in companies' businesses and any company generating receivables within its
      activities is a current or potential purchaser of CMS or seller of debt.3 The same is
      true for portfolio companies of Nordic Capital, which could be potential customers
      of Lowell Group for CMS and debt portfolio sales. The possibility of sales of CMS
      or purchases of debt do not therefore constitute material relationships such as
      would bring into question Lowell Group's independence from the Parties.
13.   Lastly, there are a number of transitional agreements (e.g. relating to IT services
      and brand licensing) that will remain in place for a limited period of time following
      Closing4, in order to allow the Divestment Business to be transferred to Lowell
      Group without jeopardising business continuity. Given the transitional nature of
2   See case COMP/M.7761 – PERMIRA / OTPP / GFKL GROUP / LOWELL GROUP.
3   See footnote 5 of the Decision.
4   The transfer of the legal title of the Divestment Business to Lowell Group.
                                                          3

     such arrangements, they do not create any risk to Lowell Group's independence
     from the Parties.5
14.  In view of the above, the Commission considers that Lowell Group is independent
     of and unconnected to the Parties.
     (c)    Financial resources, proven expertise and incentive to maintain and
            develop the Divestment Business as a viable and active competitor
15.  Lowell Group has sufficient resources to finance the acquisition of the Divestment
     Business (purchase costs of EUR 741 million). Lowell Group will finance the
     acquisition both through equity and debt financing. Lowell Group has obtained
     financing commitment letters for its debt financing from a number of large
     financial operators.
16.  Lowell Group achieved revenues of GBP 454 million in 2016, which represented
     growth of 24.7% on the previous year. Cash EBITDA has been positive in the past
     years (GBP 254 million in 2016), with an annual growth rate of over 10% since
     2014. While the acquisition will increase Lowell Group's external debt, the
     resulting leverage ratio will be consistent with Lowell Group's debt covenants and
     historical leverage ratios, and with ratios in the industry. In addition, Lowell
     Group's financial projections show a profitable post-financing position, which will
     contribute to a significant reduction in the leveraging of the business by 2022.
17.  Lowell Group has extensive experience in both debt collection and debt purchasing,
     being active in these industries in the UK and the DACH region. It has long-
     standing relationships with customers in a variety of sectors, including major pan-
     European customers, and thus has the means to leverage its existing client base
     when moving into the Nordic countries. In addition, Lowell Group's advisory team
     includes individuals with considerable first-hand experience in the Nordic markets.
     In particular, a former CEO of Intrum Justitia and Board Director of Lindorff is
     expected to take up a post as Board Director.
18.  Furthermore, Lowell Group has extensive experience in acquiring, integrating and
     developing businesses in new geographic areas. Since 2013, Lowell Group has
     successfully completed the acquisition and integration of five companies and can
     count on a dedicated and established integration team. In addition to Lowell
     Group's own capabilities, its shareholder Permira has significant experience as
     partner to large corporations in carve-out transactions.
19.  Lowell Group will invest significant financial resources in purchasing the
     Divestment Business. This acquisition appears to give Lowell Group the
     opportunity to expand its business in other major European markets, which is
     consistent with Lowell Group's strategic objective of becoming a pan-European
     CMS provider.
5   As stated in the Decision (paragraph 477), the market test confirmed that transitional agreements
    included in the Divestment Business are sufficient in scope and duration for the purchaser to be able
    to operate the business independently.
                                                      4

20. The Trustee has reviewed Lowell Group's business plans for the five countries
    concerned and considers that it has demonstrated interest in the whole of the
    Divestment Business. It is committed to maintaining and developing both the CMS
    and the debt purchasing businesses in all five countries included in the Divestment
    Business.
21. Lowell Group's post-acquisition projections show a significant increase in profits
    and cash EBITDA. The Trustee considers that such forecasts demonstrate that
    Lowell group will have a powerful incentive to develop the business and to
    compete effectively in the Divestment Business's markets. In addition, the
    projections show that there are real opportunities for growth in all five markets:
    Sweden, Norway, Finland, Denmark and Estonia. While the Estonian market is
    significantly smaller in size than the other markets, it nonetheless contributes
    positively to the growth of the business and is considered by Lowell Group as a
    'way in' to the other Baltic markets. Overall, there are thus strong grounds to believe
    that Lowell Group will have a decisive financial incentive to maintain and develop
    the Divestment Business in each of the five countries concerned.
22. In view of the above, the Commission considers that Lowell Group has the
    financial resources, proven expertise and incentive to maintain and develop the
    Divestment Business as a viable and active competitive force in competition with
    the Parties and other competitors on the markets concerned.
    (d)    Absence of prima facie competition problems
23. The Commission concluded in the Decision that the market for debt collection and
    the market for debt purchasing are both national in scope. Lowell Group mainly
    operates in the UK, Germany, Austria and Switzerland and has some minor
    activities in Slovenia and Croatia. Lowell Group does not have any debt collection
    and debt purchasing activities in the countries where the Divestment Business is
    active, i.e. Norway, Sweden, Finland, Denmark and Estonia. There is therefore no
    horizontal overlap between the activities of purchaser and the Divestment Business
    in the EEA.
24. As explained in paragraph 12, the acquisition does not create any meaningful
    vertical links. Any company generating receivables could be a potential customer
    for debt collection or debt purchasing, and those activities do not generally
    constitute essential inputs to a company's business. The potential relationship
    between other portfolio companies controlled by Lowell Group's shareholders and
    the Divestment Business, with the former as customers, does not therefore create
    any meaningful vertical links.
25. The proposed acquisition of the Divestment Business by Lowell Group will require
    approval by the Danish competition authority and by financial services regulators in
    Sweden and Norway. The Trustee considers that the purchaser can be reasonably
    expected to obtain all necessary approvals from the relevant authorities within a
    reasonable timeframe, and thus that this process will not delay the implementation
    of the Commitments. On this basis, the Commission does not envisage there being
    any obstacle to the successful implementation of the divestment process.
26. This prima facie assessment is based on the information available for the purpose
    of this buyer approval and does not prejudge the competition assessment of the
                                               5

     acquisition of the Divestment Business by Lowell Group by a competent
     competition authority under applicable merger control rules.
     (e)     Minor amendments to the Commitments
27.  The Commitments provide for the transfer of a royalty-free exclusive […] brand
     licence to the purchaser, in relation to the Intrum Justitia brand in Norway and the
     Lindorff brand in Sweden, Finland, Denmark and Estonia. The Parties and the
     purchaser have agreed, with the Trustee and Commission's consent, that a small
     number of exceptions will be made vis-à-vis the exclusivity of the licence.
     Specifically, the Parties will be allowed to use the licensed trademarks for: i) cross-
     border activities which require the Parties to communicate, exclusively in the
     ordinary course of business, with affiliates of their customers, business partners and
     authorities located in a country where the trademark is licensed to the purchaser6;
     ii) their holding companies, for a phase-out period ending no later than three
     months after Closing; and iii) their holding companies, to refer to their former
     company names after the phase-out period, to the extent that is reasonably
     necessary in order to comply with applicable laws. […].
28.  The exceptions agreed above allow the trademark licensing agreement to be
     managed more effectively and ensure the separation of the purchaser acquiring the
     Divestment Business from the Parties. The Commission therefore considers that
     these minor changes to the Commitments do not in any way affect the viability and
     competitiveness of the Divestment Business after the sale.
29.  A small number of members of key personnel named in the Commitments have
     been replaced by other individuals following resignations and other staff
     movement. The hold separate manager of the Divestment Business is satisfied that
     the changes have not had any detrimental effects on the business, and has not raised
     any issues relating to the viability and/or the competiveness of the Divestment
     Business. The Trustee is also of the opinion that these minor changes will not
     impact the viability or the competitiveness of the Divestment Business.
III. CONCLUSION
30.  On the basis of the above assessment, the Commission approves Lowell Group as a
     suitable purchaser for the above-mentioned reasons.
31.  On the basis of the Proposed Agreement, the Commission further concludes that
     the Divestment Business is being sold in a manner consistent with the
     Commitments.
6     This is necessary, for example, when the Parties serve a customer in one country, but need to send
      information (e.g. invoices) to a customer's branch that is located in another country, where the
      trademark is licensed to the purchaser. The Parties may only use the licensed trademarks in such
      circumstances if they clearly state: i) their corporate identity, ii) the country in which they are
      legally registered, iii) that they, and not the purchaser, is the sender of the document, and iv) that
      they do not provide services and/or products in the country in which the trademark is licensed.
                                                          6

32. This decision only constitutes approval of the proposed purchaser identified herein
    and of the Proposed Agreement. This decision does not constitute a confirmation
    that Nordic Capital has complied with its Commitments.
33. This decision is based on Section D of the Commitments attached to the
    Commission Decision of 12 June 2017.
                                                   For the Commission
                                                   (Signed)
                                                   Johannes LAITENBERGER
                                                   Director-General
                                              7
 <<--NEW VERSION-->>                                 EUROPEAN COMMISSION
 In the published version of this decision, some                 Brussels, 12.6.2017
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article                C(2017) 4137 final
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are                      PUBLIC VERSION
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.                                            To the notifying party:
Subject:        Case M.8287 - Nordic Capital / Intrum Justitia AB
                Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) in conjunction with
                Article 6(2) of Council Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the
                Agreement on the European Economic Area2
Dear Sir or Madam,
1.     On 12 April 2017, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
       concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which Nordic
       Capital Fund VIII Limited (“Nordic Capital”) of Jersey acquires within the meaning
       of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation control of the whole of Intrum Justitia
       AB (“Intrum Justitia”) of Sweden by way of purchase of shares (the
       “Transaction”).3 Nordic Capital plans to combine the operations of Intrum Justitia
       with those of its portfolio company Lindorff. Lindorff is referred to as ‘the
       Notifying Party’ and Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are collectively referred to as ‘the
       Parties’.
I.     THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
2.     Nordic Capital is a private equity investor, primarily investing in large and
       medium-sized companies in the Nordic region and in German-speaking parts of
       Europe. It also invests in global healthcare and European industry.
3.     Lindorff is one of Nordic Capital’s portfolio companies. It is headquartered in
       Norway and is active in the provision of credit management services (CMS), in
       particular debt collection, credit information and scoring, payment services and
1      OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the ‘Merger Regulation’). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty
       on the Functioning of the European Union (‘TFEU’) has introduced certain changes, such as the
       replacement of ‘Community’ by ‘Union’ and ‘common market’ by ‘internal market’. The
       terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2      OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the ‘EEA Agreement’).
3      Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C128, 22.04.2017, p. 5.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

      invoice services, and in debt purchasing. Lindorff is present in the following
      European countries: Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
      the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Spain and Sweden.
4.    Intrum Justitia is active in the provision of CMS and factoring and in debt
      purchasing. It is present in the following European countries: Austria, Belgium, the
      Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland,
      Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden,
      Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
5.    The Transaction involves the acquisition within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of
      the Merger Regulation by Nordic Capital of the whole of Intrum Justitia by way of a
      purchase of shares. Following the Transaction, Nordic Capital will hold an
      estimated [40-50]% of the shares in Intrum Justitia. The remaining shares in Intrum
      Justitia are widely dispersed and no other individual shareholder will hold more than
      10% of shares. Nordic Capital will therefore acquire de facto control over Intrum
      Justitia.
II. EU DIMENSION
6.    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
      more than EUR 5 000 million4 (Nordic Capital: EUR [amount], Intrum Justitia:
      EUR 601 million). Each of the undertakings has EU-wide turnover in excess of
      EUR 250 million (Nordic Capital EUR [amount] and Intrum Justitia EUR [amount])
      but neither achieves more than two-thirds of its aggregate EU-wide turnover within
      one and the same Member State.
7.    The Transaction therefore has an EU dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the
      Merger Regulation.
III. MARKET DEFINITIONS
III.1. Introduction
8.    Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are both debt collection agencies active in a large
      number of countries across Europe. They offer credit management services,
      including debt collection, to a range of customers including banks, telecoms and
      utilities companies and SMEs. They are also both active in debt purchasing,
      primarily in the area of unsecured debt.
9.    The Parties’ activities are largely complementary from a geographic perspective,
      with Lindorff being present mainly in Central and Eastern Europe and Intrum
      Justitia in Western Europe. There are a number of EEA Member States, however,
      where both are present, including the Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Italy,
      the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Spain and Sweden.
10. The Transaction therefore creates a number of horizontally affected markets within
      both CMS (including debt collection) and debt purchasing in Finland, Sweden,
      Norway, Denmark and Estonia. It creates horizontally affected markets in debt
4    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
      Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
                                                        2

     purchasing only in Spain, Germany and the Netherlands. The Transaction does not
     create any reportable vertical links.5
11. The Commission has not previously considered the markets for CMS, debt
     collection or debt purchasing.
                   III.1.A. Credit management services (CMS)
12. The term credit management services (CMS) is used to refer to a number of related
     services that may be required by companies which provide goods or services on
     credit. The main types of CMS that can be distinguished are: credit information and
     scoring, payment services, invoicing and debt collection. CMS can be carried out by
     the company itself as part of its own operations or can outsourced to a third party.
13. Credit information and scoring primarily involves performing creditworthiness
     checks on either new or existing customers, including for the purposes of debt
     collection.
14. Payment services are services that allow a company to offer its customers flexible
     payment options, such as invoicing or part-payment, while itself receiving payment
     immediately on completion of a sale. The payment services provider therefore
     covers the credit risk in the interim period.
15. Invoicing services involve generating and sending out invoices for transactions
     between the company and its customers.
16. Debt collection involves the recovery of overdue debts owed to a company
     including through recourse to legal collection procedures.
17. The Notifying Party submits that there is an overall market for the provision of
     CMS. It argues that, although there is no demand-side substitutability between the
     different services, clients often purchase them together in various combinations. The
     Notifying Party also refers to the high level of supply-side substitutability between
     different CMS. It maintains that the resources and expertise needed for providing
     the different types of CMS are largely the same.
18. The Notifying Party further argues that a product market for CMS (or any narrower
     product market within CMS) should include in-house provision of these services.
     The main reason for this claim is that, in the Notifying Party’s view, a company’s
     decision as to whether to procure CMS will depend on the cost relative to in-house
     provision, and that as such, in-house provision acts as a competitive constraint on
     CMS providers.
19. It is not contested that there is no demand-side substitutability between the different
     CMS services; the market investigation showed that also the supply-side
     substitutability between the different CMS is more limited than claimed by the
     Notifying Party. Whilst it is true that there may be some overlap in the resources
5   A number of Nordic Capital's portfolio companies are current or potential purchasers of CMS from
    Intrum Justitia and could also sell debt to Intrum. CMS are not, however, an essential input in these
    companies' businesses: any company generating receivables within its activities is a current or
    potential purchaser of CMS. Vertical links are therefore not relevant for the purposes of the
    competitive assessment of the Transaction.
                                                        3

     and expertise required for the different services, it is not the case that all debt
     collection agencies offer the full range of services or could easily start doing so. A
     number of competitors mentioned that the largest debt collection companies
     typically provide the full range of services, but that for smaller companies this may
     be more difficult. The majority of respondents felt that it would be difficult for a
     company only active in debt collection to start offering additional services, e.g.
     invoicing or payment services, due to the significant investment required.
     Competitors often highlighted the need for dedicated IT systems, for each type of
     CMS, in particular for payment services6, while credit information and scoring also
     requires a very large database, which takes time to build up.
20. The market investigation indicated that in-house and external provision of CMS, in
     particular debt collection, are in no way substitutable for the vast majority of
     respondents. Although many customers perform some CMS in-house, this is most
     often the early stages of debt collection, e.g. sending the first couple of reminder
     letters, which does not require any particular expertise. There are also a number of
     respondents which like to keep collection in-house for their most important
     customers, in order not to risk damaging the relationship. For the vast majority of
     cases, however, respondents expressed a very strong preference for outsourcing debt
     collection as they do not consider it a core activity7, and expect that a specialised
     debt collection provider will be able to achieve better results more efficiently due to
     their expertise and resources8. The legal collection phase was in particular
     considered to be an area where specific skills and experience are required, which
     customers do not typically have in-house, making it difficult to carry out collection
     effectively.9 As a result, most customers consider it more cost-efficient to outsource
     the main part of collection activities.
21. Furthermore, only a minority of respondents would be inclined to insource debt
     collection activities were prices to increase. This is mainly due to the large
     investment that would be required to set up in-house collection units10, and also
     doubts as to whether, even given a price increase, it would be more economical in
     the long run to manage debt collection internally. The fluctuations in the volumes of
6   “To start providing payment services, investment in IT systems (secured servers, databases,
    connections to credit information providers, connections between the service provider and the client,
    user interfaces etc.) will be required.” Competitor, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q6.
    “It is complex to start offering payment services from scratch. To deliver various types of payment
    after delivery options requires heavy IT investment and you need to have the right licences and staff
    with the right skills to have control of regulations and to monitor changes in regulations.” Competitor,
    Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q6.
7   “We are a bank, not a late collection company. It is not our business strategy to run late collection”
    Customer, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q5.
8   “Collection is a specific profession better executed by dedicated professionals” Customer, Finland –
    Questionnaire 10, Q5.
    “The external collection companies have a more efficient collection processes and they possess
    competence that we do not have in-house.” Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q5.
9   “We tried to do legal debt collection in house a number of years ago but it was stopped by senior
    management, probably because it was not profitable.” Customer, Denmark – Questionnaire 9,
    Q28.1.1.
10  “Once debt collection has been outsourced, it would be costly and complicated to take it in-house
    again. This is mainly due to systems and the need for recruiting new staff. Qualified staff is also hard
    to find in the market.” Customer, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q28.1.1.
                                                          4

     debt cases to be collected on can make it difficult for smaller companies in
     particular to have sufficient staffing levels without incurring excessive costs.11
22. In view of the above, the Commission considers, firstly, that the market for CMS
     should be restricted to external provision of these services, as internal provision is
     not a realistic option for the majority of potential customers12. For those companies
     which do choose to use in-house CMS teams for all or some of their customers, this
     decision results from strategic choices (e.g. giving preferential treatment to the most
     important customers), rather than a comparison of the cost-effectiveness of internal
     and external provision. Furthermore, the difficulty of switching between in-house
     and external provision means that it would be inconceivable for companies to
     alternate between the two in response to movements in prices or other such
     considerations.
23. Secondly, the Commission considers that the different services within CMS each
     form a separate market. Most importantly, the lack of demand-side substitutability
     between the services is a strong argument against considering that CMS could
     constitute one product market. As regards the supply-side, the market investigation
     results confirmed that not all debt collection agencies provide the other CMS, and
     for those that do, these other services are often offered as ‘add-ons’, particularly on
     the request of customers, but would not be provided on a stand-alone basis. It would
     require significant investment for a debt collector to start offering the other CMS.
     Similarly, for providers that specialise in payment services or invoicing services, for
     example, starting offering debt collection services would involve the set-up of a
     whole new business unit – it can in no way be seen as an extension to their existing
     business. In particular, the need to hold a specific licence for debt collection limits
     the supply-side substitutability between this and the other CMS, and suggests that it
     is not considered on a par with other CMS from a regulatory point of view.
24. For the purposes of this case, the only market of relevance is the market for debt
     collection, as the Parties do not provide any of the other services apart from in a
     package with debt collection services. The Decision will therefore focus on the
     analysis and the assessment of the debt collection market.
               III.1.A.1 Debt collection
25. Debt collection can involve a range of different measures, all designed with the aim
     of achieving repayment of a debt. The main phases in the debt collection process are
     reminders, amicable collection, legal collection and debt surveillance. Debt
     collection is a regulated process, which can, in most countries, only be carried out
     be licensed providers. The fees that can be charged for specific services are also
     very often restricted by law.
26. Sending reminders to a debtor is typically the first stage in the debt collection
     process. Around 5-7 days after the due date for payment, a letter is sent to the debtor
     informing them that the debt could be transferred to amicable collection. Letters
     sent by a third-party debt collection provider can be sent either in its name or in the
     name of the creditor.
11  “Debt collection is a cyclic activity, and we outsource to have the necessary flexibility” Customer,
    Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q5.
12  With the partial exception of the very early stage collection, which in any case does not represent an
    alternative to the full service offered by CMS providers.
                                                        5

27. If a debt is not paid following one or a number of reminders, amicable collection
    then begins. The debtor receives a letter demanding payment, usually around 20-30
    days after the payment date, warning that legal action could be taken. At this stage,
    additional action could be taken such as terminating an agreement or an ongoing
    contract (e.g. for a phone line).
28. Legal collection can only begin after amicable collection has been attempted. The
    debt collection provider (or the company itself) obtains a court order or other similar
    judgement allowing it to take enforcement measures, such as the garnishment of
    salaries or accounts and the seizure of property, goods and chattels.
29. Debt surveillance is usually used when it is clear that a debtor is currently unable to
    pay a debt. The debtor’s financial situation is monitored, and when this improves,
    the debt can be moved back into amicable collection or legal collection.
30. The Notifying Party submits that, similarly to the CMS market, the debt collection
    market should be considered to include in-house provision. The Notifying Party
    maintains that there are companies in all sectors with their own debt collection unit,
    and also that companies with their own in-house debt collection unit can easily start
    providing debt collection services to third parties.
31. As described above, the market investigation revealed that the vast majority of
    respondents do not consider in-house debt collection to be a realistic alternative to
    the services provided by a specialist debt collector. Most customers acknowledge
    that they do not have the necessary skills and resources in-house to carry out debt
    collection, and that they would therefore not be able to achieve the same efficiency
    as professional debt collectors. Furthermore, customers generally do not consider
    debt collection as part of their core business activity and therefore have no
    inclination to devote time and resources to it. For most, there would need to be a
    very considerable increase in the price of external debt collection (at least more than
    10%) for them to consider bringing debt collection in-house, in particular in view of
    the very significant investment this would require.
32. The Commission therefore concludes that in-house provision of debt collection
    services should not be considered to form part of the same market as debt collection
    services being provided to third parties. Potential customers of debt collection
    services do not generally see in-house collection as a valid alternative, and it is
    therefore unlikely that this theoretical possibility can act as a competitive constraint
    on debt collection agencies.
33. The Notifying Party submits that the debt collection constitutes one relevant product
    market, which should not be further segmented. The Notifying Party submits that
    most debt collection agencies supply most or all categories of clients, both in terms
    of their size or sector of activity and for most categories of debt, and that a debt
    collection agency that does not currently have clients in a particular sector can
    easily adjust its services to start competing for business from such clients.
34. The sections below set out the possible segmentations of the market for debt
    collection.
    Segmentation of the debt collection market according to the sector in which the
    creditor operates
                                                 6

35. A possible segmentation of the debt collection market according to the sector in
     which the creditor is active, distinguishing between the following broad categories:
     banks and financial institutions, telecoms companies, utilities companies, the public
     sector and SMEs (including trade, retail and e-commerce).
36. The Notifying Party emphasises that the skills, processes and assets required to
     compete effectively in debt collection are generally the same for all clients,
     irrespective of the sector in which they operate. The types of specific requirements
     that clients in particular sectors may have are, in the Notifying Party’s view, easily
     manageable. It gives the following examples: i) telecoms and utilities clients
     demand high levels of integration with specific IT systems, and the ability to signal
     to the company when a service should be cut off to a particular customer; ii) SME
     clients are more price-oriented and demand cost-effective collection; and iii) banks
     and other financial institutions are particularly concerned about adherence to ethical
     standards in collection and accurate reporting.
37. The Notifying Party further argues that the specific skills and resources required for
     serving a particular type of client can be acquired easily. For example, the IT add-
     ons can be purchased on the open market, and it is easy to attract and recruit new
     staff with the required skills and experience. Furthermore, the Notifying Party
     submits that a debt collection provider wishing to enter a new sector could also
     consider buying the in-house debt collection activities of a client in that sector.
     Lastly, the Notifying Party suggests that a debt collection provider could start by
     competing for smaller clients in a particular sector in order to acquire experience,
     which would then help it to acquire larger clients. The Notifying Party also
     mentions that banks in particular often add a new supplier to a benchmarking
     exercise, initially with only a small percentage allocation of their business, which
     can be a good opportunity for a debt collection provider to move into the financial
     sector.
38. The Commission notes, firstly, that some of the arguments put forward by the
     Notifying Party are very generic and lack sufficient reasoning specific to the debt
     collection market. In particular, it would be true to say in almost any sector that the
     expertise needed to start serving a new type of customer could be acquired by
     recruiting new staff or that new IT systems can be acquired.
39. More importantly, the market investigation confirmed that by no means all debt
     collection agents serve clients in all sectors, and that even those that do have clients
     across a number of sectors often see themselves as being specialised in one
     particular sector. As such, whilst a company may technically be able to meet the
     basic requirements of clients in all sectors, a specialised company is likely to be able
     to deliver a better service, and is therefore more likely to be chosen.13 Competitors
     explain that portfolios from different sectors will have different characteristics,
     which a debt collection provider would need to understand in order to be able to
     collect on the portfolio effectively.14 The origin of the debt claim can have
13  “A company which is specialised within a sector will be able to provide more accurate service.”
    Competitor, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q5.
14  “The cases in different sectors have different characteristics, such as the average face value, expected
    volume, average age or past-days-due date, sociodemographic characteristics of debtors, etc. These
    factors are significant in determining how to process cases efficiently.” Competitor, Finland –
    Questionnaire 2, Q4.
                                                        7

     consequences for the regulatory requirements relating to collection, and a debt
     collector would therefore need to have different workflows in place for debts from
     different sectors.15 Overall, the need for specialisation relates to both differing legal
     requirement and clients’ needs and preferences.16
40. Sector specialisation is particularly strong in respect of the financial sector, due to
     the importance of industry-specific knowledge for serving banks and other financial
     institutions. Nonetheless, other sectors also have specific requirements, for example,
     telecoms and utilities customers often have large volumes of claims to process and
     therefore need debt collection providers to have highly automated systems that can
     be integrated directly with their own systems.17 Access to the relevant information
     registers may also limit the number of competitors active in certain sectors, in
     particular the public sector.18
41. Moreover, competitors confirm that expansion into other sectors normally only
     results from acquisitions19, as expanding organically within the business would
     require very significant investment, in particular in new IT systems and staff
     recruitment and training. The length of time and level of capital that this would
     involve is typically seen as being prohibitive for most debt collection agencies.
42. In addition, responses from customers demonstrated that they attach great
     importance to a provider’s knowledge of their particular industry. This is one of the
     criteria most often mentioned when assessing the suitability of a potential debt
     collection provider20, and strongly indicates that most customers would be hesitant
     to engage a provider who does not already have an established reputation in their
     sector. A number of customers in the banking and financial sector in particular
     emphasised that the need for knowledge of their sector has restricted the number of
     possible debt collection providers they could choose from, as they consider this
     expertise crucial to successful debt collection.21 In view of this, it would therefore
     be difficult for providers to move into new sectors where they do not yet have
    “We work differently based on the capital, origin of the debt and the legislation in a sector.”
    Competitor, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q4.
15  “Specific segments are associated with different regulatory requirements (for instance, financial
    institutions and financial literacy, utilities and non-enforceable services, transport and enforceability
    of penalties, etc.) which result in a variety of adjusted workflows and processes.” Competitor, Sweden
    – Questionnaire 3, Q5.1.
16  “Clients active in different sectors have different demands as a result of the characteristics of their
    trade. Laws are different within different sectors (e.g. time bar, VAT).” Competitor, Sweden –
    Questionnaire 3, Q5.1.
    “In parking the requirements are heavy, the debtor wants a photo; in telecoms, each claim is small and
    we need to minimise the number of steps; in banking, we can only obtain data on the debtor once the
    claim has moved into legal collection.” Competitor, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q4.
17  “Utilities need direct integration in order to be handled efficiently and at low cost.” Competitor,
    Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q5.1.
18  “The parking sector is completely excluded for us due to restricted access to the traffic register.”
    Competitor, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q4.
19  “The normal and fastest way to enter or extend operational capabilities is to acquire mid-sized
    providers. The vast majority of top-tier providers have chosen this way.” Competitor, Sweden –
    Questionnaire 3, Q5.1.
20  Customers, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13,
    Q11.
21  “There are not so many debt collectors in Finland that can be used in the insurance business.”
    Customer, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q12.1.
                                                           8

     experience, other than by acquiring an existing business that is already active in a
     particular sector, as mentioned above.
43. In conclusion, there are strong indications that debt collection providers specialise in
     particular sectors. Moving into a new sector would require significant investment
     and may not be feasible even with capital available to invest due to the difficult of
     obtaining the large volumes of data needed to compete effectively. In view of these
     considerations, it appears likely that there may be separate market for debt
     collection for clients in different sectors, in particular banks and financial
     institutions, telecoms companies, utilities companies, the public sector and SMEs
     (including trade, retail and e-commerce).
44. For the purposes of this case, in any event, it can be left open whether there is one
     differentiated debt collection market or separate markets exists depending on the
     sector in which debt collection takes place, as the Transaction gives rise to
     competition concerns under any plausible market definition.
     Segmentation of the debt collection market according to the size of the creditor
45. Another possible segmentation of the debt collection market according to the size of
     the creditor, distinguishing between large companies (typically major banks,
     telecoms and utilities providers) and small companies (e.g. SME and online or mail
     order retailers).
46. The Notifying Party submits that there is no need to distinguish separate markets for
     different sizes of clients. The Notifying Party argues that providers servicing smaller
     customers can adapt their systems relatively easily, including by increasing levels of
     automation gradually so as to extend their service offering to larger customers. It
     also maintains that clients may be willing to compromise on the level of automation,
     if, for example, smaller providers are able to offer a better price.
47. The market investigation did not support the Notifying Party’s view as to the extent
     to which smaller providers can mitigate their disadvantage in terms of the system
     automation. In particular, it would appear unlikely that a smaller provider with
     lower levels of automation could nonetheless offer a better price than a large
     provider.
48. The market investigation provided very conclusive evidence that the size of the
     customer is an important criterion in determining possible debt collection providers.
     Both competitors and customers confirmed that only the largest debt collection
     providers would be able to meet the needs of large customers which generate high
     volumes of cases, and many large customers saw this as a major factor limiting their
     choice of possible provider.22 They do not consider smaller providers suitably
     qualified to meet their needs,23 in particular as they are not be able to match the
     standard of larger providers from a technical point of view, and do not have the
22  “There are only a few collection companies that really come into consideration for a bigger
    organisation like ours.” Customer, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q21.1.
   “There are many options for collection agencies in Denmark but many of them are not able to handle a
    large customer such as our company.” Customer, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q21.1.
23  “Our first debt collector was a small company and it couldn't handle our business because we have so
    many invoices.” Customer, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q13.1.
                                                       9

     same resources to devote to a client.24 The time-sensitive nature of debt collection
     means that a provider needs to have the capacity to start dealing with large volumes
     of claims as soon as they arrive. This would not be possible for small companies
     who lack the staffing levels and the necessary systems to process such volumes of
     claims quickly and efficiently. The results of the market investigation also
     highlighted that large customers often require a wider range of services (e.g.
     including other CMS) that smaller providers may not be able to offer.25
49. Competitors’ responses also showed that they consider the skills required to serve
     large customers to be different to those needed for small customers. Of particular
     importance to large customers are high levels of compliance, the ability to provide
     detailed reporting and the integration of the provider and the client’s systems. They
     may also expect the debt collection provider to tailor its collection processes and
     reporting to their needs, whereas smaller clients would typically accept standard
     processes and reports.26 Competitors also emphasise the need for systems that can
     handle large amounts of claims when working with larger customers,27 which, they
     acknowledge, may make it difficult for small debt collection agencies to meet the
     needs of these clients28.
50. In addition, competitors were aware that customers, when inviting possible
     providers to tender for a new contract, may use the size of the debt collection
     agency and its number of staff as one of the criteria on the basis of which they
     whose which companies to invite.29 This means that smaller companies would not
     even have the opportunity to compete for business from large clients.
51. Responses to the market investigation confirmed the Notifying Party’s claim that
     sometimes staff dealing with debt collection move from the creditor to the debt
     collector as part of the contract. The Commission notes however that it also may
     further limit the opportunities for smaller providers to take on large clients. Small
     providers may not have the capacity to take on a proportionally significant number
     of new staff in this way, as this obviously implies additional costs and
     administrative work.30
52. In view of the above, the Commission concludes that there may be distinct markets
     for providing debt collection services to customers of varying sizes, due in
     particular to the way in which customers’ requirements vary with their size, and to
     the need for certain specific resources (e.g. highly automated It systems and
     processes) to serve large customers. As size is a continuum, it is nonetheless
24  “Technical solutions and available resources are our main criteria. We are a large customer, so we do
    not want to use a small collection agency.” Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q10.1
25  “Some of the smaller companies did not have all the services that we needed.” Customer, Finland –
    Questionnaire 10, Q9.1.1.
26  Competitors, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Q4.
27  “For large customers we have to have a system that can handle a big amount of claims.” Competitor,
    Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q4.
28  “There may be some challenges for smaller companies to handle big volume clients.” Competitor,
    Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q4.
29  “In bigger tenders, there may be restrictions on the providers that qualify to compete based on
    turnover, number of staff, age of the company, international network etc.” Competitor, Estonia –
    Questionnaire 5, Q5.
30  “When we outsourced legal handling, Lindorff was the only provider that was able to take over FTE’s
    from the bank. That was the main reason for rejecting other providers at that time.” Customer,
    Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q10.1.
                                                      10

     difficult to define specific markets within debt collection according to the size of the
     consumer. The Commission also notes that there is some crossover between a
     segmentation based on size and a segmentation based on client sector, insofar as
     large customers are predominantly in banking, utilities and telecoms, whereas small
     customers are more often SMEs or e-commerce/market order retailers. Considering
     the sector and the size of the client together, the vast majority of competitors stated
     that not all debt collection providers are able to serve all clients.31
     Segmentation of the debt collection market according to the age of the debt
53. The Commission has also considered a possible segmentation of the debt collection
     market according to the age of the debt being collected on. Debt collection can be
     outsourced at different points in time after the due date for the payment, depending
     in part on whether the company also carries out the initial stages of the process (e.g.
     sending the first couple of reminder letters) in-house. In general, ‘younger’ or
     ‘fresher’ debt is thought to be easier to collect on, and portfolios of young debt are
     sometimes referred to as ‘spinning’ debt, whereas older debt is expected to be
     slower to collect on, and is thus ‘long-lasting’.
54. The Notifying Party submits that the age of the debt is not a relevant parameter for
     segmentation of the market as all debt collectors are able, and do in practice, collect
     on all ages of debt. The Notifying Party recognises that the approach taken by a debt
     collector will vary according to the age of the debt, e.g. younger debt is likely to
     start in amicable collection whereas older debt may be assigned directly to debt
     surveillance, but argues that this does not affect the ability of debt collection
     agencies to manage collection on debt of varying ages. In particular, the Notifying
     Party contends that collection on different vintages of debt requires, in general, the
     same skills and resources and follows the same processes.
55. The Notifying Party also emphasises that a debt case typically stays with the same
     debt collection provider for its entire lifetime – this means that, even if a provider
     takes on a contract for servicing what is initially young debt, some of these cases
     will not be resolved quickly, and will therefore gradually ‘age’ whilst under the
     management of the debt collector. Agencies competing for collection contracts for
     young debt would therefore also need to be able to deal with older debt. As a result,
     CMS providers in reality manage debt cases of all ages.
56. The results of the market investigation largely confirmed the Notifying Party’s
     claims. Very few respondents stated that they specialise in a particular age of debt
     or would only buy debt above or below a specific number of days beyond the due
     date. The vast majority of competitors confirmed that they would not exclude any
     possible business based on the age of debt. Similarly, competitors confirmed that the
     age of the debt largely determines the type of collection that would be carried out32,
     and that different skills are therefore relatively more important for collection on
31  Competitors, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Q5.
32  “Fresher debt is easier to collect as solvent debtors tend to pay earlier. Thus the mix of insolvent and
    solvent debtors is more favourable in fresh cases, and this needs to be considered in the process
    flow.” Competitor, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q4.
    “Fresh debts are mainly managed through amicable collection whereas old debts mainly require debt
    portfolio management and trade services.” Competitor, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q4.
                                                         11

     fresh and old debt respectively. Nonetheless, the vast majority respondents
     confirmed that they would be able to handle debt of all ages.33
57. A small number of respondents also mentioned that the typical age of the debt may
     depend on the sector in which the creditor is active.34 The age of the debt may
     therefore, to some extent, be taken into account in a segmentation of the debt
     collection market by sector.
58. In view of the above, the Commission considers that for the purpose of this
     Decision it would not seem appropriate to segment the market for debt collection
     according to the age of the debt.
     Segmentation of the debt collection market according to security level
59. The Commission has considered a possible segmentation of the debt collection
     market according to the security of the debt being collected on, i.e. whether the debt
     is secured (on an asset) or unsecured. Collection procedures can vary for the two
     types of debt, as the final stage in collection of secured debt would involve the
     seizure and realisation of the asset on which the debt is collected. This would
     require very different skills and expertise to those needed for standard types of debt
     collection. In addition, the value that is likely to be able to be realised on the asset in
     question would also need to be assessed when determining the likely cash flow
     generated by the debt, and thus the terms of the collection contract.
60. The Notifying Party acknowledges that quite different skills and resources are
     needed for collection of secured and unsecured debt respectively, but argues that a
     provider active in one of these areas could easily expand into the other through the
     recruitment of new staff or by winning a debt collection contract that involves the
     transfer of staff and systems (i.e. where the client had previously performed in-
     house collection).
61. In the Commission’s view, it is doubtful how easily debt collection agencies could
     move between secured and unsecured debt, given the vast experience of the two
     different processes required to be successful in each area. Nonetheless, this question
     is not of direct relevance to this case, as financial institutions (which represent the
     main creditors in the area of secured debt) in the Nordic markets do not typically
     outsource collection on secured debt. As such, secured debt represents only a very
     tiny proportion of the overall external debt collection market.
62. Respondents to the market investigation confirmed that collection of secured and
     unsecured debt respectively require very different skills and expertise.35 They
     mentioned, for example, that collection on secured debt requires knowledge of the
     market for the asset in question, e.g. the housing market in the case of mortgage
     debt, and therefore generally needs greater specialisation. The majority of
     competitors were active only in bidding for unsecured debt, and customers active in
     the financial sector generally only reported having outsourced collection on
33  Competitors, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Q4.
34  “Each sector has distinct characteristics such as . . . average age or number of days past due date”
    Competitor, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q4.
35  “Secured debts require different IT-tools, collection processes and competence.” Competitor, Sweden
    – Questionnaire 3, Q4.
                                                        12

     unsecured debt36, thus confirming that there is only a very small market for external
     collection on secured debt in Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden (in the following
     paragraphs, these four countries may be collectively referred to as the “Nordics” or
     the “Nordic markets”), and Estonia.
63. Although the Notifying Party refers to the Nordic markets only when stating that
     collection of secured debt is typically performed in-house, the results of the market
     investigation suggest that the same is true for Estonia. Respondents, including
     financial institutions, do not refer to outsourcing of collection on secured debt, and
     this appears to constitute only a very small part of the market for debt collection.
64. The market share data provided by the Notifying Party also demonstrate that the
     total size of a hypothetical market for collection on secured debt is very minimal
     relative to the overall debt collection market in all the affected markets.37
65. In view of the above, the Commission considers that there are strong indications that
     collection on secured and unsecured debt may be distinct product markets. For the
     purposes of this case, in any event, the question whether debt collection market
     should be segmented according to security level can be left open, as the Transaction
     gives rise to competition concerns under any plausible market definition.
     Segmentation of the debt collection market according to category of debtor
66. The Commission has also considered a possible segmentation of the debt collection
     market according to the category of the debtor, i.e. distinguishing between private
     customers (B2C debt) and business customers (B2B debt). This distinction could be
     relevant for almost all the sectors which typically outsource debt for collection. The
     only categories of creditor which are likely to have exclusively B2C debts are e-
     commerce and mail order retailers, parking and credit companies which typically
     issue finance exclusively to consumers.
67. The Notifying Party acknowledges that B2B claims will typically be significantly
     larger than B2C claims. Nonetheless the Notifying Party submits that a possible
     segmentation of the market into collection on B2C debts and collection on B2B
     debts would not be relevant, as customers often outsource collection on portfolios
     containing a mix of the two types of debt and debt collection providers are able to
     service both debts of debt using mainly the same knowledge and resources.
68. The fees that can be charged for debt collection services are strictly regulated in all
     the markets in question, and the fee structure is often different for individual debtors
     and for businesses. Collection on B2B debts generally involves slightly higher fees
     than collection on B2C debts. Furthermore, individual B2B debts tend to be larger.
     A B2B portfolio is therefore likely to contain fewer individual debts than a B2C
36  “Legal collection of secured debts is also done in-house. Mainly because collection agencies don't
    have the knowledge needed to collect on these debts.” Customer, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q4.1.
37  Total market size of a hypothetical market for collection on secured debt (2015): Denmark: - ;
    Sweden: EUR [amount]; Finland: EUR [amount]; Norway: EUR [amount]; Estonia: -. The only
    market where volumes of secured debt under external collection represent a significant part of the
    market is Norway, where revenue on collection on secured debt accounts for around [5-10]% of the
    total (external) debt collection market. On this market, however, Intrum Justitia is only marginally
    active (with revenue in 2015 of below EUR [amount], and a hypothetical market for debt collection
    on secured debt in Norway would not, therefore, in any case be considered an affected market.
                                                      13

     portfolio of the same size, and could thus potentially be seen as higher risk. This
     may mean that smaller debt collectors are less likely to compete for collection on
     B2B debts.
69. The results of the market investigation showed that competitors do often
     differentiate between B2C and B2B claims when competing for business. Some are
     nonetheless active in both areas, but many work exclusively or predominantly on
     B2C claims and are more interested in winning contracts in this area.38 Even those
     competitors that service both B2B and B2C claims recognise that the processes for
     collection are very different in the two areas.39 In general, collection on B2B claims
     is thought to require more skill, including more specialised knowledge of the sector
     from which the claim originates.40 B2C claims can be treated in a more standardised
     or automated way, whereas B2B claims require individual attention.41 A small
     number of respondents not active in collecting on B2B claims explained that this
     was because they lack the tools and capacity to do so. At the same time, however,
     debt collectors recognise that the same customers are likely to have both B2B and
     B2C claims.42
70. Responses from customers mainly suggested that they do not distinguish between
     B2C and B2B when outsourcing debt collection. Some customer only have one or
     the other type of claims due to the nature of their business, but for those who have
     both, they tend to have the same debt collection provider(s), rather than separating
     the claims and holding two separate tenders.
71. In conclusion, there is evidence to suggest that collection on B2B claims requires
     greater specialist skills and knowledge than collection on B2C claims, and that, as a
     result, not all debt collection agencies are able to service B2B claims. From a
     customer perspective, however, there is generally little differentiation made.
72. In view of the above, it would appear that there may be a separate market for
     collection on B2B debt. For the purposes of this case, however, the question
     whether the debt collection market should be segmented according to category of
     debtor can, in any event, be left open, as the Transaction gives rise to competition
     concerns under any plausible market definition.
     Segmentation of the debt collection market according to value of the individual
     tickets
73. Lastly, the Commission has considered a possible segmentation of the debt
     collection market according to the size of the individual debts (or ‘tickets’) within
     the debt portfolio on which collection is being outsourced.
38  Competitors, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Q4.
39  “B2B and B2C claims need to be processed differently” Competitor, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q5.1.
40  “For business claims regulatory knowledge . . . and more specialised product staff are relatively more
    important than for consumer claims.” Competitor, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q4.
41  “Claims against businesses are generally more difficult to collect as different regulations apply.
    Consumer claims are more standardised.” Competitor, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q4.
42  “B2B and B2C sectors are regulated differently in Finland and are therefore considered separate
    market areas. However, practically all larger customers have both B2C and B2B debt collection
    needs” Competitor, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q4.
                                                      14

74. The Notifying Party does not submit any arguments relating specifically to this
     possible segmentation, but is in general of the view that any further segmentation of
     the debt collection market is unnecessary.
75. The market investigation generally indicated that this criterion is not, on its own, a
     major consideration for debt collection agencies when choosing which portfolios to
     bid for. The responses to the market investigation confirmed that competitors do
     distinguish between larger and smaller tickets in their collection processes. Small
     tickets are typically simpler to collect on and can be dealt with effectively using
     automated processes. Larger tickets, on the other hand, are seen as being more
     complex,43 and tend to require more time and effort.44 Most competitors, however,
     are willing to consider portfolios with different ticket sizes.45
76. In view of the above, the Commission considers for the purpose of this Decision
     that a segmentation of the debt collection market according to value of the
     individual tickets would not lead to plausible relevant markets.
     Conclusion on product market definition for debt collection
77. As described in the sections above, there are strong indications that there may be
     distinct markets within debt collection, in particular for customers in specific
     sectors, for secured and unsecured debt, and for B2B and B2C claims. Responses to
     the market investigation strongly suggest that the expertise and resources required
     for collection varies according to these characteristics, and that not all competitors
     are able to offer debt collection services to all customers. Instead, many specialise in
     a particular sector and/or do not have the capabilities to handle, for example, claims
     against businesses or secured debts.
78. In particular, servicing customers active in the financial, utility and telecoms sector
     requires automation and scale given the general high volume of claims that need to
     be handled. In particular, specialisation appears to be strongest in the financial
     sector, as the need for sector-specific expertise is greatest, and banks and other
     financial institutions account for a large proportion of the debt collection market.
     The Commission will therefore consider separate markets for debt collection based
     on the customers’ sector of activity.
79. Given the fact that customers active in specific sectors (financial sector, telecoms,
     utilities) are also more likely to be larger in size than customers operating in other
     sectors, segmenting the market according to the customers’ sector of activity is also
     a good proxy for a possible segmentation based on the customers’ size.
80. It also appears likely that there may be a separate market for collection on B2B
     claims, as these require additional expertise and resources relative to B2C claims.
     The Commission will therefore also consider this as a possible narrower market.
81. As described above, there are strong indications that collection on secured and
     unsecured debt may be distinct product markets. In any event, this distinction does
43  “As the size of the ticket increases, so does often the average complexity of the case.” Competitor,
    Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q4.
44  Competitors, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Q4.
45  Competitors, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Q4.
                                                       15

     not need to be made for the present case, since the portion of secured debt
     outsourced for collection in the markets concerned in minimal.
     The relevant geographic market
82. The Notifying Party submits that the geographic market for CMS including debt
     collection, is national, in particular in view of the fact that the services are mainly
     procured and provided at national level, and are subject to national regulation. In
     addition, the importance of language and cultural factors in the provision of CMS
     also suggests, in the Notifying Party’s view, that the markets are national.
83. The market investigation strongly confirmed that the market for debt collection is
     national. The majority of customers source debt collection at national level, and a
     collection agency’s reputation within a particular country is of paramount
     importance when choosing a provider. Respondents also considered knowledge of
     the local market and of the culture and language to be important criteria when
     evaluating possible debt collectors. Personal contacts with particular providers also
     appear to play a significant role, again underlining the importance of a local
     presence. From a supply-side point of view, the majority of competitors confirmed
     that they operate debt collection business units at national level. The differences in
     regulation and in collection practices between the markets mean that knowledge of a
     specific country is crucial to competing effectively46, and debt collection agencies
     therefore typically have local account managers with the necessary expertise. The
     idea of operating without a local presence is not generally deemed feasible by
     competitors.47
84. The importance of holding extensive data on a particular market, and being known
     by customers is also highlighted by the way in which debt collection agencies have
     expanded.48 The vast majority of competitors that responded to the market
     investigation confirmed that setting up operations in a new geographic market
     would involve significant investment in terms of time and resources, and that, even
     should a company be willing to make such an investment, there may remain a
     number of obstacles, in particular the difficulty of acquiring the data needed to start
     operating, lack of knowledge of local regulations and of customers’ needs, and the
     time required to build a network of possible clients and/or partners to work with.49
85. The Commission therefore concludes that for the purpose of this Decision, at least
     in the markets of relevance to this case (Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway and
46  “There is always different legislation in each new market and a new way of cooperating with clients”
    Competitor, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q11.1.
47  “Serving national customers without a presence in a market is not an option for regulatory and
    sociodemographic reasons.” Competitor, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q7.1.
48  “Over the last 10 years, the industry has hardly seen any top-tier provider enter a new market by
    setting up a new organisation. The reason for this is that the time-to-market, data availability and
    technological platform outweigh the potentially necessary integration costs. The top-tier players'
    approach to internationalisation has therefore been focused on consolidation, and has increased the
    bargaining power of those larger players. To enter a market through a new organisation, one would
    need at least EUR 15m investment over the course of five years.” Competitor, Sweden –
    Questionnaire 3, Q10.2.
49  “A barrier for providing services in another country could be that one does not have enough local
    knowledge about the services that are needed, or how the local companies carry out their business.
    Furthermore, regulatory requirements could also create a barrier.” Competitor, Norway –
    Questionnaire 4, Q11.1.
                                                       16

     Estonia), the geographic market for the provision of debt collection and its potential
     segments is considered to be national.
               III.1.A.2 Other CMS
86. The Transaction creates horizontal overlaps in CMS other than debt collection, but
     none of these overlaps leads to an affected market.50 These markets will not
     therefore be discussed further in this Decision.
                   III.1.B. Debt purchasing
87. Debt purchasing involves the purchase of a creditor’s claim, whereby the ownership
     of the debt is transferred to the debt purchaser. In the majority of cases, the debt is
     collected by the purchaser, either in-house or in partnership with a debt collection
     provider. The Commission has not previously assessed the existence of a possible
     market for debt purchasing.
88. The Notifying Party explains that debt purchasing is a relatively new area of
     business, which has only really taken off over the last 15 years. Furthermore, the
     Notifying Party points out that debt purchasing has developed significantly in recent
     years, with sellers setting up more sophisticated sales processes and the number of
     competitors on the market increasing.
89. Debt sales are usually concluded following either a closed tender procedure or
     bilateral negotiations. Where the seller chooses to hold a tender procedure, it invites
     a number of potential purchasers to submit offers for the portfolio. At this stage, it
     provides only fairly limited information on the portfolio and offers are therefore
     non-binding. Based on the prices offered, the seller will then make a shortlist of its
     preferred buyers (typically three or four). These buyers are then provided with more
     detailed information on the portfolio and are invited to submit a binding offer. At
     this stage, there may also be some negotiations before the seller selects its preferred
     buyer and concludes a contract for the sale.
90. In some cases, sellers holding closed tenders for debt sales also enlist the services of
     advisors, which usually manage the running of the tender procedure and often either
     choose or advise on the potential buyers to invite. Where advisors are involved, the
     longlist of purchasers invited to submit bids is often somewhat longer than in cases
     where the seller organises the tender procedure directly.
91. Debt sellers also sometimes prefer to contact one single potential purchaser when
     they have a portfolio to offer for sale. This party is invited to submit a bid, and there
     are then usually negotiations between the seller and the buyer on the price and any
     other terms of the sale. Bilateral negotiations of this type often occur when the debt
     seller chooses to sell to the debt collection provider currently servicing the portfolio.
50  With the partial exception of Finland. The Parties' combined market share in 2016 in payment
    services in Finland was [40-50]%, with Intrum Justitia bringing a small increment of [0-5]%. The
    Parties confirmed that neither of them provides payment services as a stand-alone service, but only as
    part of a package with debt collection services. Moreover, the majority of Intrum Justitia's revenue
    from payment services in Finland in 2016 was related to […]. Given the small increment in market
    shares brought by the Transaction and the fact that payment services are provided in connection with
    debt collection, which is an affected market in Finland, the market for payment services will not be
    discussed further in this decision.
                                                       17

92. The Notifying Party submits that four main capabilities are required in order to
    compete successfully in debt purchasing: i) the ability to value debt portfolios;
    ii) access to data; iii) the ability to raise funds, i.e. access to capital; and iv) the
    ability to arrange for collection on the debt.
93. In relation to the first point, i) the ability to value debt portfolios, the Notifying
    Party explains that debt portfolios are either valued by means of statistical
    modelling, if the number of individual cases is large, or by analysis of the individual
    debts and debtors, if the number of cases is smaller. In addition, in the case of
    secured debts, the purchaser would also need to value the underlying security. The
    Notifying Party argues that debt purchasers generally possess the skills necessary to
    value any portfolio.
94. In relation to the second point, ii) access to data, the Notifying Party explains that a
    potential purchaser will use both the data provided by the seller and other sources of
    information to value the portfolio. The Notifying Party emphasises that it is in the
    seller’s best interests to provide as much information as possible, at least in the final
    stage when a smaller number of potential purchasers have been invited to submit
    binding offers. Otherwise, the bidders will be obliged to leave a large margin for
    error, in order to be sure to avoid making a loss on the portfolio, and bids will be
    less competitive.
95. The Notifying Party mentions that purchasers may also use data on comparable
    portfolios they already own or have collected on, or may buy or obtain additional
    data from third parties, e.g. credit information agencies or public sources. In the
    Notifying Party’s view, it is not essential to have internal data in order to be able to
    value a portfolio accurately, as sufficient information can be obtained from the
    seller and from external sources.
96. In relation to the third point, iii) the ability to raise funds, the Notifying Party
    submits that debt purchasers can generate capital in a number of different ways, in
    particular, i) by reinvesting cash collected on their existing portfolios, ii) by issuing
    new stocks or debt, or iii) by entering into a co-investment agreement with an
    investment fund.
97. In relation to the fourth point, iv) the ability to arrange for collection on the debt, the
    Notifying Party argues that a debt purchaser can either collect on the debt itself or
    outsource collection, thus it is not necessary to have in-house collection capacity to
    be able to compete effectively on the debt purchasing market.
98. Contrary to the claims made by the Notifying Party, the results of the market
    investigation indicated that it may be necessary to further segment the debt
    purchasing market, at least on the basis of the security of the underlying debt
    (secured debt v. unsecured debt). The results of the market investigation reveal that
    some competitors focus on the debt portfolios sold by the financial institutions. It
    seems however that this is because the vast majority of debt portfolios on sale, is
    sold by financial institutions.
99. The majority of competitors who responded to the market investigation purchase
    only unsecured debt, and see secured debt as a totally different area of the market,
    involving quite different skills and processes. The general view was that purchasers
                                                  18

     specialise in either secured or unsecured debt, although there are incidences of
     competitors being seen as strong in both areas.51 A number of respondents explained
     that the skills needed to purchase secured debt are far more specialised, as expertise
     is needed in both the valuation of the underlying asset and in realisation of the value
     of this asset – both skills which are entirely distinct from those required for
     valuation of and collection of unsecured debts.52
100. Internal documents provided by the Parties confirmed that they both focus mainly
     on consumer unsecured debt, and in particular on the financial sector. Internal
     documents prepared in relation to the merger highlight that Intrum Justitia purchases
     [share]% of its debt from financial institutions and Lindorff [share]%.53 These
     proportions, in particular for Lindorff, demonstrate that financial sector debt is a
     main focus for both the Parties. It should be however underlined that overall, the
     debt portfolios sold are in vast majority sold by the financial institutions.
101. A significant number of customers see a clear distinction between the markets for
     secured debt and unsecured debt. The reasons they give for this are similar to those
     mentioned by competitors, and relate mainly to the different skills and expertise
     needed for valuation and collection.54 Debt collectors were seen as the typical
     bidders for unsecured debt whereas secured debt is perceived as attracting more
     interest from investment funds and private equity.55 Some respondents did mention
     that, although investment funds may be present in unsecured debt, it is debt
     collection companies that are the strongest competitors in this area. 56 Customers
     often only had experience in one or the other area (e.g. some banks outside the
     Nordic markets only sell secured debt, and customers other than banks generally
     only sell unsecured debt). Many customers were also aware that their unsecured
     portfolios would be too small to be of interest to investment funds – at least in some
     markets, the size of a portfolio and its type (secured or unsecured) appear to be
     related, with secured portfolios typically seen as higher value, and therefore more
     attractive to financial investors.57
102. Some respondents to the market investigation also saw specialisation by sector as
     typical of the debt purchasing market.58 The general picture was often that debt
     purchasers generally prefer to purchase in the same areas as where they are active in
51  “Purchasers are typically specialised in secured or unsecured.” Competitor, Denmark – Questionnaire
    1, Q41.
52  Competitors, Germany, Netherlands, Spain – Questionnaires 6, 7 and 8, Q4.4. Competitors, Denmark,
    Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Q38.
53  Nordic Capital internal document of 14 November 2016, entitled 'Intrum Justitia and Lindorff to
    Combine, Creating the industry leading provider of credit management services,' Form CO, Annex
    NC16, slides 8-9.
54  “They specialise according to secured vs. unsecured, as the collection competence differs
    significantly according to whether collaterals play a role or not.” Customer, Germany – Questionnaire
    14, Q8.1.
55  Customers, Germany, Netherlands, Spain – Questionnaires 14, 15 and 16, Q6 and Q7.1. Customers,
    Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13, Q38.
56  Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q7.1.
57  “The nominal value of (NPL) consumer portfolio's sold in the Netherlands is usually too small (<
    EUR 25 million) for private equity and asset management companies to be interested. They are more
    interested in commercial real estate (CRE), secured loans (mortgages), deleveraging transactions and
    the sale of non-core assets.” Customer, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q11.1.
58  “Most purchasers specialise in a specific industry, although seeking opportunities in other industries”
    Competitor, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q41.
                                                        19

     debt collection, meaning that if a competitor specialises in the collection of financial
     sector debt, they would also be mainly interested in purchasing in this same
     segment.59 The reasons for this tendency are further detailed in the section IV.1
     below on the link between debt purchasing and debt collection. The specialisation
     seen by sector in debt collection, in particular specialisation in the financial sector,
     may therefore mean that segmentation of the debt purchasing market by sector is
     also relevant, at least insofar as relates to the financial sector, which accounts for a
     large proportion of all debt sales.
103. In view of the above, the Commission concludes that purchasing of unsecured debt
     constitutes the relevant product market in the area of debt purchasing. There may
     also be a narrower market within this overall market, in particular for the purchase
     of debt originating in financial sector, this question can, however, be left open as the
     competitive assessment of Transaction remains the same for the overall market for
     purchasing unsecured debt and the market for purchasing unsecured debt from
     financial institutions..
The relevant geographic market
104. The Notifying Party submits that the geographic market for debt purchasing is EEA-
     wide. The main reasons it gives for this are as follows:
105. Firstly, the Notifying Party contends that it is not necessary to have the ability to
     collect on the debt in a particular market in order to be able to compete effectively
     in debt purchasing in that market. It claims that sellers are interested in obtaining the
     best price for the portfolio and will not consider whether the purchaser is present in
     collection in that country. Furthermore, a purchaser can easily cooperate with a local
     debt collection agency if it does not have the knowledge needed to value the
     portfolio accurately.
106. The Notifying Party further argues that the modelling and analysis skills required to
     value portfolios are the same across all countries, and that debt purchasers can
     therefore easily enter a new market without having to develop new tools or
     processes.
107. Third, the Notifying Party emphasises the importance of the data provided by the
     seller for valuing the portfolio, thus reducing, in its view, the need for additional
     information which may come from already being active in a particular national
     market. Any additional information which is needed can easily be purchased from
     specialised service providers or obtained from publicly available sources.
108. In relation to the size of portfolio, whilst conceding that investment funds may only
     be interested in portfolios above a certain size, the Notifying Party maintains that, in
     general, competitors will be interested in all sizes of portfolio, that sellers will
     typically invite potential purchasers from beyond their national borders, and that
     sellers may also bundle debt into larger portfolios if they feel that this will increase
     the number of interested buyers.
109. Lastly, the Notifying Party mentions that sellers may choose to sponsor the entry of
     new players into a particular country in order to increase the number of competitors
59  Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q8.
                                                   20

     present. The seller normally provides some sort of assistance to allow the new
     entrant to compete on a level playing field with existing competitors.
110. The results of the market investigation strongly contradicted most of the Notifying
     Party’s arguments. A large majority of customers confirmed that, for unsecured
     debt, it is important to them for the debt purchaser to have local knowledge and
     many also mentioned that they have a strong preference for selling to purchasers
     that are active themselves in debt collection in the same geography.60 Some sellers
     are prepared to consider selling to investment funds, but generally only when the
     investment fund is buying in partnership with a debt collector having local
     knowledge, that will then collect on the whole of the portfolio.61 The vast majority
     of customers emphasise that they still consider debtors as ‘their customers’ even
     when a portfolio has been sold on, and therefore attach considerable importance to
     the debt collection practices of the purchaser. Sellers generally feel that their
     reputation would suffer were a purchaser to employ bad practices in collection, and
     they therefore go to great lengths to assure themselves of the credentials of the
     purchaser.62 For unsecured debt, a purchaser who is unknown in the national debt
     collection market would therefore not be considered in the vast majority of cases.
     The picture is quite different for secured debt, as local presence is regarded as much
     less important (again illustrating the clear distinction between purchasing of secured
     and unsecured debt).63
111. The Notifying Party’s second point that the models used for valuing portfolios
     across markets are the same is not contradicted by the market investigation, but
     competitors also emphasised the importance of specific benchmark portfolios. These
     would need to be from the same national market and industry, and it is therefore
     only competitors that are already active in a specific market that would have such
     information in-house.
112. Furthermore, competitors almost unanimously confirmed that the data provided by
     the seller is not sufficient to perform an accurate valuation.64 Many competitors
     regarded in-house data as more valuable, and almost all saw it as at least as valuable
     in being complementary to the data provided by the seller.65 A small number of
     competitors recognised the existence of other third party sources of information
60  “Collection companies are most suitable.” Customer, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q38.
61  “If a reputable third party conducts the actual collection activities, it could be an option.” Customer,
    Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q38.1.
    “If the portfolio is large enough and the investors team up with the right servicing party, it can be a
    good arrangement” Customer, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q11.1.
62  “To avoid bad collection practices potentially distorting our reputation as the selling institution, we
    need to know that clients are treated according to good practice.” Customer, Norway – Questionnaire
    12, Q36.
    “We expect our customers to be treated as well as we would treat them ourselves.” Customer,
    Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q9.
    “We consider ourselves responsible for the treatment of our customers. We do not want to be
    associated with a potentially unreliable partner.” Customer, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q9.
63  Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q7.1.
64  “You need to have experience and data regarding the type of debt you want to buy. Otherwise you
    will not be able to calculate the right price of the portfolio.” Competitor, Denmark – Questionnaire 1,
    Q42.
65  “Own data from collection workout is essential and typically more reliable than those of the seller.”
    Competitor, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q36.1.
                                                          21

     from which data could be bought, but these sources were generally regarded as
     unreliable and/or not sufficiently detailed.66
113. Sellers consider the reputation and collection practices of potential purchasers to be
     amongst the most important criteria for assessing suitable competitors, and the
     Notifying Party’s argument that sellers will be prepared to look beyond their
     national borders in order to obtain a better price does not appear to hold.
     Furthermore, both competitors and customers confirm that portfolios almost always
     contain debt from a single country. The extent to which sellers with small portfolios
     can bundle debt to create larger portfolios would appear to be very limited. The
     market investigation showed that many already only hold fairly occasional sales
     (typically every 1-2 years), which already include all the debt they consider suitable
     to sell (based on calculations of the likely rate of return). Further bundling does not
     therefore seem feasible. A significant proportion of debt is also sold through
     forward-flow arrangements, where bundling would not in any case be an option.67
114. The Notifying Party’s last point, relating to sponsoring of market entry, refers, in the
     Commission’s view, to isolated incidents rather than a phenomenon of sufficient
     scope to have any impact on the overall market landscape. The vast majority of
     competitors’ responses confirmed that it was very difficult to enter neighbouring
     markets, even for players who are strong elsewhere. One of the main reasons for this
     is the lack of knowledge and data on the local market, which makes it very difficult
     to make competitive bids and to collect efficiently on the portfolio.68 Competitors
     also emphasised the need to have debt collection capacity in the market.69 In
     addition, there can be considerable differences in both local debt collection practices
     and national regulation, which can make it very difficult for a provider that does not
     know the national market to compete effectively.70 All these factors can constitute
     significant barriers to entry for expanding from one country into a neighbouring
     market.71 In addition, competitors emphasised the time and financial investment that
     would be required to enter a new market, even if all these obstacles were
     overcome.72
115. In addition to the above, the results of the market investigation also showed that the
     majority of competitors manage debt purchasing at least in part at national level. In
66  Competitors, Germany, Netherlands, Spain – Questionnaires 6, 7 and 8, Q35.1.1 and Q35.1.2.
    Competitors, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Q22.
67 Forward-flow agreements are situations in which debt purchaser agrees to buy a certain amount of debt
    at a pre-agreed price to be paid for and transferred from seller in smaller tranches at pre-determined
    future points in time.
68  “In our opinion, buying debt from new area requires a lot of knowledge about the local circumstances
    (legal, processes, economics etc.). We have not considered expanding to new countries currently.”
    Competitor, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q44.
69  “The most significant barriers are the access to historical data per industry and the availability of a
    suitable debt collection service, especially when operating with external debt collection providers.”
    Competitor, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q46.
70  “It is difficult due to the fact that the legal system and access to public information is different in
    every country.” Competitor, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q45.
    “Each country has their own particular debt collection procedures. They differ a lot and if you don't
    know how it works it is almost impossible to forecast the outcome” Competitor, Netherlands –
    Questionnaire 7, Q10.1.
71  Competitors, Germany, Netherlands, Spain – Questionnaires 6, 7 and 8, Q10.1 and Q11.1.
    Competitors, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Estonia and Sweden – Questionnaires 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Q11.
72  Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q10 and Q10.1.
                                                         22

     some cases, there is collaboration between national and regional/central level, e.g.
     where national managers are in contact with the sellers and propose the bids they
     would like to make, but need approval from regional or central level.
116. Similarly, competitors confirm that regulations and market conditions differ
     significantly between countries, again indicating that markets are likely to be
     national.73
117. In view of the above, for the purpose of this Decision the Commission concludes
     that the market for purchasing of unsecured debt and its potential segments are
     national in scope.
IV.   COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
IV.1. Link between debt collection and debt purchasing
118. To the extent that debt purchasers then collect on the debt they own, debt collection
     and debt purchasing are very closely related markets, as both require expertise in
     valuing portfolios and in collecting on debt. From the point of view of the creditor,
     the two ‘services’, i.e. external collection on debt and sale of its claims, could also
     be seen as alternatives. A company which is owed money by its customers has a
     number of choices available: it can i) choose to collect on the debt itself, if it has the
     internal resources and expertise necessary, ii) outsource debt collection to an
     external provider, or iii) sell the debt. The choice between these three options will
     typically depend on the company’s own resources and the predicted rate of return
     that each would deliver. As discussed above, option (i) is not realistic for many
     companies as they do not have the tools and staffing to handle debt collection in-
     house. The choice between (ii) and (iii) will depend mainly on which the company
     thinks will achieve the highest rate of return overall, and on their desire to get the
     debt off their balance sheet and generate income on it immediately. 74 If a company
     outsources debt collection, the cash flow this generates will by definition be
     uncertain, and may be spread over a number of years, whereas a debt sale offers a
     certain and instant revenue, but without the possibility of higher-than-predicted
     returns.
119. Even if debt collection and debt purchasing are separate markets, it is clear that
     there are very strong links between the two activities, and that competitive strength
     in one area constitutes a significant advantage in the other. The results of the market
     investigation demonstrated that both competitors and customers perceive debt
     collection and debt purchasing (on unsecured debt) as closely linked. The main
     reasons for this are as follows.
120. The vast majority of respondents confirmed that experience in debt collection makes
     it easier to compete in debt purchasing, and many even considered debt collection
     experience and capacity a necessity for success in debt purchasing. Debt collectors
     are better placed than other competitors to value portfolios as they hold large
73  “Conditions differ considerably between countries mainly due to differences in regulation. There are
    also some differences in the macroeconomic environment and in competitive pressure.”
74  “We only sell portfolios if this is a better option in terms of return than maintaining the assets on our
    balance sheet.” Customer, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q4.
    “The price should justify the decision to sell the debts rather than collecting them through internal
    and/or external collection processes.” Customer, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q9.
                                                          23

     volumes of data that they have amassed over time through their debt collection
     activities. Competitors described how they use these portfolios as benchmarks in
     order to predict the likely collection revenue on portfolios they are bidding on, and
     thus to be able to value the portfolio more accurately and make a more competitive
     bid.75 The advantage of being present in debt collection is therefore all the greater if
     the provider is active in the same sectors and types of debt in collection and
     purchasing, as the portfolios will then be more comparable.76 One of the reasons for
     the importance of internal data is that the data provided by the seller is generally
     considered to be insufficient to value the portfolio accurately and the availability
     and usefulness of other sources of information is very limited.77
121. Furthermore, presence in collection is itself a significant competitive advantage. As
     mentioned above, when selling portfolios companies are still concerned that debtors
     will be treated correctly, as they consider any mistreatment of customers as a risk to
     the company’s own reputation, even if this occurs after the portfolio has been sold.
     As revealed by the responses to the market investigation, for debt sellers, the
     reputation of the purchaser is one of the most important selection criteria. When
     organising tender procedures, sellers usually preselect the potential purchasers to
     invite based on a number of criteria, including their reputation and collection
     practices. In the knowledge that only purchasers that meet certain requirements are
     included in the invite to tender, the seller can then choose between the bidders
     primarily on the basis of price. Whilst most sellers do not exclude selling to a
     purchaser that does not have its own debt collection activity in-house, they would
     almost always need to know, before even inviting this competitor to bid, which
     collection agency it would work with and for this collection agency to have a strong
     reputation in the market.78
122. From the debt purchasers point of view, this is more complicated and it is often the
     case that debt collectors concentrated their debt purchasing activities in countries
     where they have collection capacity.
123. The responses to the market investigation also indicated that there is often a direct
     link, with customers of debt collection services often choosing to sell to their
     incumbent provider. A significant proportion of competitors report that business
     from debt collection clients accounts for a large proportion of their debt purchasing.
     Some respondents suggest that customers would only sell directly to their existing
     debt collector without holding a tender when the portfolio is quite small (and would
     therefore arguably not justify the cost of holding tender procedure), whereas for
     larger portfolios, they claim that most sellers would always hold a tender procedure
75  “Benchmarking against a similar portfolio is necessary.” Competitor, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7,
    Q35.1.1.
76  “Having debt collection services in place is very helpful for gathering data. The more comparable the
    tender portfolio is to the debt collection portfolios (e.g. industry, age and average amount of claims),
    the less risk there is in acquiring the portfolio, as the purchaser can make precise estimations of
    expected returns.” Competitor, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q36.
77  “Debt collection data is by far more important than data provided by the seller.” Competitor, Finland
    – Questionnaire 2, Q70.
    “Consultants use generalised quotas for the recovery curves of the portfolio which may neglect the
    specifics of the buyer.” Competitor, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q69.
    Competitors, Spain and Netherlands – Questionnaires 7 and 8, Q35.1 and Q35.1.2.
78  “If the portfolio is large enough and the investors team up with the right servicing party, it can be a
    good arrangement” Customer, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q11.1.
                                                         24

     (which does not, of course, prevent the existing debt collector from ultimately
     participating in the tender and purchasing the portfolio).79
124. Both customers and competitors confirm that the debt collection provider will have
     a number of advantages over other competitors in bidding for the portfolio, and also
     that there are several practical and cost benefits to the seller; First, the debt
     collection provider will be best able to value the portfolio as, having collected on it,
     it will have by far the best knowledge of the portfolio and will be able to predict
     future cash flow most effectively.80 As a result, the debt collection provider will
     have a lower margin for error on its bid and will therefore be able to submit a
     competitive price.81 A minority of customers did, however, acknowledge that the
     debt collector’s in-depth knowledge of the portfolio may result in it offering a lower
     price.
125. Moreover, several customers explained that depending on the terms of the debt
     collection agreement, the current debt collection provider may be able to prevent
     other potential purchasers from having access to data on collection on the portfolio
     to date, thus further increasing their own advantage in the bidding process. If data
     on collection are considered to belong to the debt collector, such collector can
     prevent the owner of the debt from providing data on collection.82
126. In addition, many customers mentioned the convenience of selling to their existing
     debt collector. The data on the individual debt cases will have already been
     transferred to this provider, and, to the extent necessary, the customer and the
     provider’s IT systems will already have been integrated to allow the transfer of
     cases and feedback of information and reporting. As such, very little further
     integration will be needed at the point of selling the debt, as the cases themselves
     are already with this provider.83 Selling to the incumbent debt provider therefore
     minimises the additional work and time entailed by the process of selling a debt
     portfolio.84
127. Many customers also mentioned that they prefer selling to their existing debt
     provider because they already have a good relationship with them, and know their
     collection practices. They can therefore sell the portfolio in the knowledge that their
     customers (i.e. the debtors) will continue to be treated in the same way, and that the
     company’s reputation will not risk being damaged by malpractice on the part of a
79  Customer, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q16.2.
80  “The current servicer has an information advantage as it was able to learn from the collections
    conducted on these claims and thus will be better able to assess the value of the portfolio.”
    Competitor, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q16.1.
    “As the debt collector has all the information about the debtors, action taken to date, payment history
    etc. it has a huge advantage over third parties.” Competitor, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q16.1.
81  “The debt collector has much more information about the portfolio than its competitors, which will
    reduce risk and uncertainty regarding the portfolio performance, and hence allow it to make the
    highest bid.” Competitor, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q51.1.
82  Customer, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q12.2 and Q12.3
83  “It definitely supports a simple sales approach as KYI checks are already performed, compliance
    requirements already meet at the point of entering into the third party collection agreement as is the
    technical transfer of receivable details.” Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q39.1.
84 “There are few start-up costs such as implementing workflows, processes and training staff, which
    makes it easier and cheaper to sell to the debt collection supplier which is already servicing the
    portfolio.” Competitor, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q50.1.
                                                        25

     debt purchaser.85 There is a very strong feeling amongst sellers that debtors continue
     to be their responsibility and that any problems with collection practices would
     reflect on their company. In addition, selling to the existing debt collection provider
     means that debtors will continue to deal with exactly the same people, and that there
     will not therefore be any interruption or risk of complaints.86
128. Lastly, a large number of respondents mentioned the risk of incurring additional
     fees if debt is sold to a purchaser other than the incumbent provider. Debt collection
     contracts often include provisions to ‘compensate’ the debt collector should the
     owner of the debt choose to sell, but these charges are obviously dropped if the
     owner of the debt is selling to the current collector. There is therefore also often a
     financial incentive for customers to sell to their current debt collector.87
129. The Parties’ internal documents also confirm that debt collection customers
     constitute an important source of debt purchasing business. One document states
     that a “[…],”88 while another explains that “[…].”89 The more general
     complementarity between debt purchasing and debt collection is also described in
     an internal document that cites the benefits of this link, namely “[…]”, which lead to
     “[…].”90
130. As illustrated by the above, there are both financial and other incentives for
     customers to sell to their existing debt collection provider.91 The price bid by the
     debt collector is likely to be competitive, due not only to their knowledge of the
     portfolio but also because they do not have to take account of the cost of system
     integration and other processes in their price. The customer also often sees selling to
     their current provider as the easiest and lowest-risk solution.92
131. A minority of customers were aware of the risk of a conflict of interest in selling to
     their existing debt collection provider. The knowledge that the customer is likely to
85  “The selling party has already established a relationship, and knows the level of compliance (which
    eliminates the risk of potential reputational damage if a provider does not conduct collection in an
    appropriate manner).” Competitor, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q16.1.
86  “Customers are already in contact with the current debt collector which is an advantage for both
    parts.” Customer, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q39.
87  “It is much easier to sell to a provider who is handling the debt collection activities based on the
    price/ fee structure used in debt collection in Finland. In some cases it can even be an obstacle to sell
    to some other provider.” Competitor, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q50.
88  Nordic Capital internal document of November 14 2016, entitled 'Intrum Justitia and Lindorff to
    Combine, Creating the industry leading provider of credit management services,' Form CO, Annex
    NC16, slide 17.
89  Lindorff internal document of October 13 2016, entitled '[name], Market perspective' Form CO,
    Annex L12, slide 42.
90  Internal document of 13 March 2017, entitled 'Intrum Justitia and Lindorff to Combine, Creating the
    industry leading provider of credit management services,' Form CO, Annex MSC1, slide 47.
91  “The agency we have been sending our debt collection cases to usually has the most interest in our
    portfolio. For us as well it is easiest to sell it to a party who has full understand of the contents of the
    portfolio. They also usually offer a better price than a party that has no knowledge of the portfolio.”
    Customer, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q39.
92  “Selling to other companies would be difficult and expensive.” Customer, Finland – Questionnaire
    10, Q39.
                                                             26

     ultimately sell the portfolio to them may disincentivise efficient collection.93 These
     customers were therefore reluctant to sell to their debt collection provider.
132. Overall, a majority of customers (around 60%) have sold debt portfolios to the
     company that was providing them with debt collection services at the time of the
     sale. For many respondents, this is a normal, routine part of their process for
     handling debts.94 In addition, sellers may not all appreciate that the incumbent
     provider can provide the best offer for the very reason that it does not have to take
     integration and other administrative costs into account, whilst other bidders do.95
     Depending on who bears these costs, this can also mean that another purchaser
     would have to offer a higher price for the seller to be interested.96
133. The arrangements through which customers sell debt to their debt collection
     providers also vary. Some hold occasional one-off sales via tender procedures, e.g.
     when a certain amount of debt has accumulated, or when they feel market
     conditions are favourable for selling, and the debt collection provider is the highest
     bidder. Others decide to sell the debt to the debt collection provider – again, on a
     one-off basis – following collection over a certain period of time, and yet others
     have forward-flow sales to their debt collection provider as part of their standard
     process for dealing with debts.
134. Whilst, as described above, being active in debt collection can help a debt purchaser
     to compete effectively, debt purchasing can also improve a competitor’s position in
     debt collection. The main reason for this is that debt purchasing is a way of
     acquiring a large volume of portfolio data very quickly, which can then be used in
     debt collection, e.g. to model debtors behaviour.
135. More generally, the responses to the market investigation confirmed that the specific
     competences required to compete successfully in the two areas are very similar, and
     that customers choose external debt collection providers and debt purchasers on
     very similar criteria, showing that they value the same characteristics. As explained
     by one of competitors “There is synergy between the debt collection and debt
     purchasing businesses, whereby the capability to be an active player in both
     businesses improves the performance of both businesses.” 97
136. The criteria considered most important by customers in their choice of debt
     collector or debt purchaser is reputation. In both areas, customers also regard price
     as a decisive factor. The only major difference in the characteristics that customers
     value most highly in the two areas is that access to financing and size are considered
     more important criteria in debt purchasing than they are in debt collection.
93  Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q12.2., Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15,
    Q12.1.
94  “Usually receivables are sold to the agency handling the collection. Only a few companies have the
    organisational and economic resources to buy larger portfolios or enter into large scale forward flow
    agreements.” Customer, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q35.
95  “Sometimes there's also a fee involved if the customer wants to transfer the portfolio to a new party
    and to make a bid attractive, the third party needs to cover this fee on top of the purchase price.”
    Competitor, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q50.1.
96  “You are more less forced to sell the current collection agency (because it´s too costly and
    complicated to move it elsewhere). It´s only the VERY few times when the price is MUCH better
    (25% higher or more) that we even bother selling to anybody else.” Customer, Norway –
    Questionnaire 12, Q39.1.
97  Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q3.
                                                      27

137. Furthermore, competitors tend to have the same reputation across the two areas, i.e.
     a competitor that is perceived to be trustworthy and reliable in debt collection will
     benefit from the same good reputation with respect to debt purchasing. This means
     that competitors are likely to be similarly strong in the two areas, and, especially if
     they specialise in certain sectors in both areas, are likely to have a very similar
     image and profile.
138. In conclusion, whilst debt collection and debt purchasing are undoubtedly distinct
     markets, each meeting specific customer needs and requiring to some extent
     different resources and competences on the part of competitors, it is clear that they
     are very closely linked. As described above, many of the same skills and attributes
     are valuable in the two areas, such as valuation and collection capacity, and
     reputation. Presence in either of the two areas is a significant advantage for
     competition in the other, in particular as regards debts in the financial sector.
     Nonetheless, there are competitors present in only one of the two areas, critical
     requirements for each mean that competitors could not instantly move between the
     two, and the business models are very different. It can therefore be concluded that
     the markets for debt purchasing and debt collection are neighbouring markets,
     which exert a considerable influence on one another. In the competitive assessment
     of each of these markets, the Commission will therefore take into account any
     particular competitor’s position on the other.
IV.2. Horizontal assessment
                 IV.2.A. Overall competitive assessment
139. The debt collection and debt purchasing markets are fairly similar in nature across
     the Nordic markets and Estonia, and the Parties also have similar competitive
     strengths in all of these countries. The competitive assessment will therefore give a
     brief overview of aspects common to the whole region before considering each
     geographic market individually in more detail. Instead, debt purchasing in the other
     three affected markets (Germany, the Netherlands, and Spain) present peculiar
     characteristics, which will be discussed for each country specifically in the
     individual sections. Therefore, these three markets will not be further discussed in
     the following overall assessment.
              IV.2.A.1 Debt collection
140. As explained in section III.1.A.1, there is no need to conclude on possible
     segmentations within the debt collection market since in any event the Transaction
     gives rise to serious doubts. Therefore, the Commission will conduct the
     competitive assessment of the overall debt collection market as well as based on the
     plausible segmentations relevant for the case. Since the market investigation
     revealed there are strong indications that the market could be segmented based on
     the customers’ sector of activities, the Commission will assess the impact of the
     Transaction based on this segmentation. As explained, segmenting the market
     according to the customers’ sector of activity represents also a good proxy for a
     segmentation based on the customers’ size. Given the fact that unsecured debt
     represents almost the totality of debt outsourced for collection in the five markets
     concerned, the assessment will de facto relate only to collection on unsecured debt.
     If the Commission were to segment the debt collection market according to the type
     of debt (B2B/B2C) the overall assessment of the Transaction would not change;
     thus this distinction will not be further considered.
                                                 28


     i) Switching providers is easy
144. The Notifying Party emphasises, first, that there are a large number of competitors
     active on the market that could easily increase the volumes of debt collection cases
     they manage. Amongst these competitors, there are many that offer other CMS
     alongside debt collection, in the same way as do the Parties. There is also a mix of
     both well established and newer players, and of internationally active and local
     providers. The Notifying Party thus argues that a customer wishing to switch
     provider would have a wide choice of other options.
145. The Notifying party further submits that debt collection providers can start serving
     new clients quickly and easily, meaning that a customer always has the option to
     switch. The Notifying Party explains that, although the IT systems of the CMS
     provider and the client need to be configured, this is often very easy and can be
     achieved within a short time. The Notifying Party does recognise, however, that this
     would depend on the client’s specific IT system, and could sometimes be a lengthier
     process. In addition, the Notifying Party states that larger clients often expect a
     higher level of automation, e.g. for transferring debt cases to the debt collection
     provider and for sending back messages on the state of the cases and the action to be
     taken. The Notifying Party maintains, however, that such a system would not
     necessarily require a greater degree of configuration. More generally, the Notifying
     Party acknowledges that putting in place a more complex reporting system, as
     desired by some clients, can be a more time consuming aspect of the set-up for new
     clients.
146. The Notifying Party maintains that any differences in the requirements for
     customers from different sectors are minimal, and that, in general, the complexity of
     setting up systems for taking on a new client varies between individual clients,
     rather than being determined by their sector or any other characteristic.
147. The Notifying Party points out that the services provided by debt collection agencies
     are, to a large extent, homogenous and that fees charged to debtors for different
     services are regulated. As a result, the debt collection process is very standard
     across providers who compete on the fees they charge to the customer (i.e. the
     creditor) and solution rates.
148. The Notifying Party submits that switching costs are low in debt collection and the
     exclusivity clauses are now used much less often than in the past, and are rarely
     used by large clients. This means that customers can easily conclude a contract with
     an additional provider. In addition, the Notifying Party states that contracts are
     typically short (1-2 years) and often contain termination clauses.
149. Lastly, the Notifying Party mentions the use of benchmarking, i.e. where customers
     have two or more debt collection providers concurrently, to which they allocate
     cases according to their performance over the most recent period. According to the
     Notifying Party, benchmarking is most often used by larger customers, and makes it
     easier for them to compare the performance of different providers and to move their
     business accordingly. The Notifying Party points out that it is easy for customers to
     compare the performance of their different providers due to the homogeneity of the
     services offered, and that any increase in price or fall in collection rates is therefore
     quickly identified and disciplined. This makes the threat of a customer switching
     provider more credible. Moreover, even if one particular provider is given all or
     almost all a customer’s cases at a particular point in time, the customer can quickly
     move business away again should standards fall.
                                                30

150. The Notifying Party maintains that the Parties are rarely the only two providers
     competing in a benchmarking exercise, and that, even where this is the case, the
     customer could easily add other providers of suitable calibre.
     ii) It is easy for new providers to enter the debt collection market
151. The Notifying Party submits that barriers to entry are low in debt collection,
     particularly because there are no significant sunk costs and the level of capital
     required to set up a business is modest. The Notifying Party also adds that a debt
     collection licence can be obtained quickly and easily in all the countries concerned,
     and that there are no significant technical barriers to entry.98 In addition, the
     Notifying Party stresses that the resources and expertise necessary for competing in
     debt collection are easy to acquire in the five affected countries. In particular, there
     is extensive data available from public sources and market knowledge can be
     obtained by recruiting experienced staff. Lastly, debt collection providers can use
     the same systems to serve different categories of client, thus reducing the initial
     investment required to start competing effectively.
152. Following on from the above, the Notifying Party also submits that potential new
     entrants can enter the debt collection market quickly, and that new entry is likely in
     the coming years. Firstly, debt collection is a profitable and growing market,
     meaning that new competitors have an incentive to enter. The Notifying Party also
     points out that there are no significant capacity constraints in debt collection. New
     providers can easily start offering services on a small scale and then build up
     gradually. In addition, small providers can benefit from new technological solutions,
     which allow them to provide services in a cost-effective way, and thus to offer
     competitive prices, without having the scale advantage of larger established players.
     More generally, the Notifying Party maintains that new providers can increase their
     service portfolio quickly.
153. In addition, the Notifying Party highlights two specific ways in which new
     competitors can enter the debt collection market: i) companies that perform debt
     collection in-house sometimes then start offering debt collection services to third
     parties, and thus transform this activity into a part of their business; and ii)
     customers sometimes ‘sponsor’ the entry of a new player in order to ensure a
     competitive market. This may involve awarding a contract to a very new provider
     that is not yet fully operational on the market, often within a benchmarking exercise.
     iii) In-house debt collection acts as a competitive constraint
154. The Notifying Party submits that performing debt collection in-house is the starting
     point for most clients, and that they generally keep part of their debt collection in-
     house, e.g. sending initial reminders. This allows them to vary the point in the
     collection cycle at which they outsource. Furthermore, having some in-house
     collection means that customers can easily compare the costs of external collection
     with their own internal costs and solution rates. As a result, the possibility of
     customers ‘insourcing’ debt collection acts as an effective competitive constraint on
     external providers such as the Parties.
98  In the Notifying Party’s view, the only main technical requirement for starting to compete in debt
    collection is a platform, which can be obtained for just over EUR 100 000 for a company with 50
    FTEs.
                                                     31

155. In addition, the Notifying Party claims that it is easy for clients that generate a
     limited number of claims to expand their in-house debt collection capacity. The
     Notifying Party acknowledges, however, that it would be more difficult for larger
     clients, and that they are therefore more likely to look for another CMS provider if
     they are unhappy with the service offered by their current debt collector. The
     Notifying Party emphasises that some larger companies have, nonetheless, chosen to
     start performing debt collection in-house. In the Notifying Party’s view, this
     constitutes a strategic decision on the part of the business, as a much higher level of
     investment would be required than for a company with a small number of cases to
     handle. The Notifying Party adds that companies can in-source gradually, e.g. by
     initially starting to perform only the early stages of debt collection in-house. The
     Notifying Party estimates that it would take on average six months to set up a
     functioning debt collection unit.
     Conclusion
156. In summary, therefore, the Notifying Party submits that the Transaction would not
     be damaging to competition on the market for debt collection, as customers would
     continue to benefit from a choice of providers and high levels of service. The
     Notifying Party maintains that there is currently a wide range of debt collection
     agencies active on the market, which can easily expand their capacity to meet new
     customers’ needs, and that customers can switch between providers easily.
     Furthermore, barriers to entry are low meaning that new entrants are likely to join
     the market. Lastly, customers’ ability to perform debt collection in-house acts as
     constraint on debt collection agencies, as there is a credible threat that the client
     could decide to perform debt collection in-house again if prices are no longer
     advantageous.
     Commission’s assessment
157. In response to the points put forward by the Notifying Party, as outlined above, the
     Commission makes a number of observations. Firstly, while the Notifying Party
     may consider a narrower segmentation of the debt collection market unnecessary,
     the market investigation provided strong evidence that such a segmentation may be
     appropriate, as described in the product market definition. Moreover, even if a wider
     market for debt collection is considered, it is clear that there is considerable
     differentiation within this market, and that all competitors are not equally capable of
     serving all clients. In addition, contrary to the Notifying Party’s claim, in all five of
     the countries in question, the Parties have a significant combined market share in
     debt collection overall, and very high market shares in several of the main narrower
     sectors, i.e. these are not isolated incidences where the Parties’ market shares are
     coincidentally higher than their typical level. By way of illustration, the Parties have
     combined market shares of over [40-50]% in all sectors in Finland, over [40-50]%
     in the financial sector in all countries, and over [40-50]% in at least two of the three
     main sectors (utilities, telecoms and financial sector) in all countries except Norway
     (where they have over [30-40]% in telecoms and over [60-70]% in the financial
     sector).
158. The market investigation provided strong evidence to challenge the three main
     arguments put forward by the Notifying Party: i) that it is easy for customers to
     switch debt collection provider; ii) that it is easy for new entrants to enter the debt
     collection market, and that the entry of new providers is therefore likely; and
     iii) that customers can and do perform debt collection in-house, which acts as a
                                                  32

     competitive constraint on external debt collection agencies. Each of these is
     addressed in the following sections.
     i )“Switching providers is easy”
159. The Notifying Party’s claim that there are a large number of competitors active on
     each of the national markets is true, to the extent that there are a large number of
     registered debt collection providers. The market shares held by many of these
     competitors demonstrate, however, that they are unlikely to be able to exert
     significant competitive pressure. There is no more than one other competitor with a
     market share of over 10% in any of the five countries99 and generally very few
     others, sometimes none, with market shares over 5%. This highlights that the Parties
     are consistently two of a very small group of larger providers.
160. Furthermore, as already discussed in the section on product market definition, the
     market investigation confirmed that not all debt collection providers are able to
     serve all clients. There is some evidence of specialisation by sector, with providers
     earning a reputation for expertise in collection for a particular sector, e.g. the
     financial sector, telecoms or utilities, and customers also valuing sector specific
     knowledge. Furthermore, responses from both customers and competitors indicated
     very strongly that providers need to have a certain level of capacity, specific tools,
     resources and expertise in order to be able to serve larger clients, such as major
     banks, telecoms and utility companies. In particular, processing the volumes of
     claims generated by such customers demands sophisticated IT systems with a high
     level of automation. The debt collection provider would also need to have a very
     large capacity in terms of personnel, as cases need to be dealt with very quickly
     once they arrive, in order for the chances of successful collection not to fall. Large
     customers are not generally willing to trust smaller providers with their debt
     collection business. Customers feel very strongly that their reputation is at stake
     when they send cases for external collection, and are therefore very conservative in
     their choice of providers. This makes it even more difficult for smaller providers to
     compete, in particular for larger customers, and the established players therefore
     tend to form a ‘top tier’, competing mainly with each other rather than with any of
     the smaller players active on the market. Larger customers with more complex
     requirements therefore have a very limited choice of possible providers.
161. The market investigation also demonstrated that, contrary to the Notifying Party’s
     claim, switching providers is perceived as a difficult and time-consuming process by
     both customers and competitors. Competitors confirmed that the work needed to
     configure IT systems and put other operational procedures in place with a new
     customer, especially a customer with a large volume of claims, can be very
     extensive, requiring up to 12 months in some cases. The responses provided by
     customers also showed that they are reluctant to switch providers, due mainly to the
     expense and inconvenience involved. The importance of reputation and trust in the
     debt collection market, as mentioned above, also contributes to the reluctance to
     switch. Although most customers recognise that it would not be impossible for them
     to move to a new provider, many have not switched at all over the last five years,
     and the general indication is that, for many customers, a small increase in price or
     deterioration of the service provided would not be sufficient to make them look for
99  In Denmark, there are no such providers, with the next closest competitor having a market share of [5-
    10]%.
                                                      33

     alternative providers. Even if the information provided by the Notifying Party in
     relation to the time necessary for taking on new clients is assumed to be
     representative (which responses suggest it may not be, with most competitors citing
     longer period of time), it is clear that there is a strong disincentive for customers to
     switch provider – both the cost and the time (up to six months) associated with
     moving to a new provider has the natural consequence that the market is very sticky,
     giving a significant advantage to incumbent players such as the Parties.
162. The Notifying Party’s claim that the services provided by debt collection agencies
     are fairly standard is mainly validated by the results of the market investigation.
     Customers confirmed that the services themselves vary little between providers, as
     the steps in a debt collection case are laid down by law (i.e. a case cannot be moved
     into the next phase unless certain steps have already been carried out and/or a
     certain time period has elapsed.) Nonetheless, customers confirmed that they value a
     provider’s ability to service their debts for the whole of the collection cycle, i.e.
     from the initial reminders right through to legal collection. This is a criteria that can
     sometimes differentiate providers, as not all are able to offer legal collection.
     Furthermore, many customers also prefer to source other CMS from their debt
     collection provider, for reasons of convenience, and many smaller providers do not
     offer these other services. As mentioned above, debt collection providers also vary
     considerable in terms of their capacity and the sophistication of their platforms and
     systems. Larger providers naturally benefit from their scale advantage in terms of
     being able to invest more in the development of IT solutions. In view of this, whilst
     it may be true that providers cannot easily differentiate themselves on the services
     they offer, there are nonetheless a number of other important criteria on which
     customers choose their provider. Customers tend to use these characteristics as a
     starting point for identifying possible suitable debt collectors, thus often eliminating
     all but the top tier at this stage, and then make their final choice on the basis of
     price.
163. As stated by the Notifying Party, contracts for debt collection are often quite short,
     and the use of exclusivity clauses does not appear to be standard practice. The
     responses provided to the market investigation suggested that contracts are typically
     for periods of 18-24 months, broadly consistent with the information provided by
     the Notifying Party. Nonetheless, many customers mention there being penalties for
     terminating a contract early. Moreover, irrespective of the contractual terms
     imposed on customers, the practical costs and implications of changing provider act
     as a very strong deterrent. The freedom or lack of provided by typical contracts is
     not therefore of any real consequence in determining the nature of competition on
     the market. Many customers renew their contract with the existing provider without
     holding a tender procedure each time the contract comes up for renewal, as they
     know that it is very unlikely that any other debt collector could offer a price
     sufficiently below that offered by the incumbent provider to compensate the
     additional costs involved in switching.
164. The market investigation showed that, whilst benchmarking is used by a small
     number of large customers, this is by no means standard practice on the market. For
     many smaller and medium-sized customers the cost of setting up a benchmarking
     system is too high for the gain that could be expected. Responses also suggested that
     benchmarking is fairly new in the debt collection market, and that even those
     customers currently using it are not always very experienced with the system.
     Moreover, customers that use benchmarking are almost by definition customers
     with large volumes of cases and/or more complex cases, whose needs can only be
     met by a very small number of providers. This means that the choice of possible
                                                  34

     providers for the benchmarking exercise is very limited – whilst the customer may
     be able to change the value of cases that they allocate to each provider according to
     their performance, there is relatively limited scope for adding new providers.
     Furthermore, Lindorff and Intrum Justitia would almost always be two of the main
     contenders for a place in the benchmarking exercise, and the Transaction would
     therefore have a significant effect on customers who benchmark, and who therefore
     need a certain minimum number of credible competitors in order for the
     benchmarking to be effective, i.e. in order to be able to effectively maintain
     competition in this way.
     ii) “It is easy for new providers to enter the debt collection market”
165. Contrary to the claim made by the Notifying Party, barriers to entry are very high in
     the debt collection market. Whilst it may be relatively easy to obtain the necessary
     licence, and the levels of capital required for entry are not especially high, there are
     other significant obstacles which make it very difficult for new entrants to gain a
     foothold in the market. Competitors very strongly emphasised the importance of
     having both experience on a particular national market and extensive historic data
     and models for that market. They explained that debt collection works quite
     differently in each of the markets, and that a provider would therefore need to be
     familiar with the local practices. Even more importantly, it is widely considered to
     be almost impossible to start competing on a new national market, even for a
     competitor already present on neighbouring markets, due to the paramount
     importance of data on similar portfolios. Debt collection providers rely heavily on
     such data to predict collection rates and to determine their strategy for collection.
     Competitors confirmed that such data is not generally available from any public
     sources and cannot be easily purchased, and that it is therefore very difficult for new
     entrants to compete effectively. As a result, it is very rare that an entirely new player
     would enter any of the national debt collection markets. Instead, existing debt
     collection providers generally look to expand through acquisitions, i.e. purchasing a
     smaller player on a market in which they are not yet active. From a competition
     perspective, this does not, however, constitute new entry on the market, and it is
     therefore true to say that the established players are, to some extent, protected by the
     very high barriers to entry. This also makes it extremely unlikely that the loss of one
     main competitor would lead to new entry, i.e. the market would not, on its own,
     counter the effects of the Transaction.
166. Furthermore, the results of the market investigation suggest that it is very difficult
     for smaller players to increase their market share. As explained above, switching
     providers is a costly and time-consuming process, and customers are often reluctant
     to engage ‘unknown’ debt collection providers due to the risk to their reputation.
     Customers have a very strong conviction that any malpractice on the part of the debt
     collection provider will reflect badly on them, and are therefore inclined to stay with
     providers they know and trust. In addition, smaller providers generally do not have
     the technological capacity to meet the needs of larger clients, and it is therefore very
     difficult for them to move into the top tier of providers. A large number of
     respondents also emphasised the advantage that larger debt collection providers
     have due to the volumes of data they are able to amass – processing a large volume
     of cases allows them to acquire large banks of data more quickly, which in turn
     allows them to predict collection rates more accurately and to manage debt cases
     more efficiently and successfully. It is therefore very difficult for smaller providers
     to break through, as they have a significant disadvantage to overcome in terms of
     both their collection capacity and their data resources.
                                                  35

167. Lastly, the Notifying Party maintained that market entry can occur when a company
     that performs debt collection in-house starts offering debt collection services to third
     parties, or when a large customer chooses to sponsor entry by supporting a new
     player. Although the Notifying Party provided a small number of examples of both
     cases, the results of the market investigation confirmed that these are isolated
     incidences, and that neither scenario – companies expanding from in-house to third
     party provision, or large customers sponsoring entry – occurs sufficiently often to be
     considered as part of the normal functioning of the market. The vast majority of
     market respondents had very little or no experience of such events, and, as such, it is
     highly unlikely that either could have any meaningful influence on the ease of entry
     to the debt collection market in general. As further explained below, it is very rare
     for large companies to perform debt collection in-house, and cases where this has
     happened, and where the company has then gone on to develop this into a business
     activity by serving third parties can only be regarded as ‘one-off’ cases, that there is
     no reason to expect would occur again. Similarly, sponsorship of a new entrant by a
     large customer would appear to be a very isolated phenomenon, which has and
     would only occur in very specific circumstances.
     iii) “In-house debt collection acts as a competitive constraint”
168. The results of the market investigation very strongly confirmed that customers are
     not generally at all inclined to perform debt collection in-house. The vast majority
     state that they have neither the necessary expertise nor the resources available and
     that starting to perform debt collection in-house would require significant
     investment and would take time to put in place. Moreover, most customers simply
     do not regard debt collection as part of their core business, and have no interest in
     keeping it in-house. They generally believe that debt collection is better performed
     by specialists, i.e. external debt collection agencies, which they expect to be able to
     process the cases more efficiently than they could themselves, and to achieve better
     results. As a result, the vast majority of customers were quite sure that performing
     collection in-house would be less cost-effective.
169. Furthermore, customers confirmed that they would not consider bringing collection
     in-house again were prices for external debt collection to rise. As mentioned above,
     setting up a debt collection capacity in-house would involve considerable time and
     expense. The decision as to whether or not to outsource debt collection is generally
     regarded as a strategic decision, rather than one which would depend merely on the
     price for external debt collection at any particular point in time. The level of
     investment required to start, or re-start, performing debt collection in-house is such
     that companies could certainly not easily switch between in-house and external
     provision according to fluctuations in the prices for external debt collection.
     Competitors also confirmed that they do not see internal debt collection as a real
     threat to their business, i.e. whilst there may be a risk of customers moving to
     competitors if, for example, prices increase, the idea of customers starting to
     perform collection in-house is not seen as a realistic scenario. As such, the
     Notifying Party’s claim that in-house debt collection provision acts as a competitive
     constraint is not validated by the responses to the market investigation – instead,
     customers acknowledge that once they have outsourced debt collection, it would be
     very complicated and costly to start collecting in-house again. This would only be
     done as part of a change in strategy rather than in reaction to a change in the
     services offered by debt collection providers. Competitors are aware of this, and
     know that the only real competition comes from other debt collection providers.
                                                  36


     correction factor to the tenders the Parties are aware of.100 In addition, the data do
     not take into account any sales concluded following bilateral negotiations. The data
     should therefore be treated with caution, particularly as it appears that a significant
     proportion of business on the market for debt purchasing may result from bilateral
     negotiations, where reputation and pre-existing relationships with potential sellers
     are very important.
175. The market shares are provided over a 3-years period (2013-2015). Given the fact
     that debt sales can change considerably between one year to another both in terms of
     volume and value, the Commission believes that taking into account an extended
     period of time allows to better assess the Parties’ strength on the market.101 The
     Parties did not provide relevant information on market shares for their
     competitors.102
176. As can be seen from the table, the Parties’ combined market shares in debt
     collection are particularly high in terms of value, at above [40-50]% in all five
     markets and reaching as high as [70-80]% in Denmark. In terms of volume, the
     Parties combined market share is also considerable, at over [40-50]% in Sweden and
     Denmark, over [30-40]% in Norway and over [20-30]% in Finland and Estonia.
177. The Notifying Party underlines that it does not agree with a definition of the debt
     purchasing market at country level, and that, at EEA-wide level the Parties would
     have a combined market share of well below 20%. Even if the markets are
     considered to be national, the Notifying Party claims that the Transaction would not
     create competition concerns. It puts forward a number of arguments, which are
     outlined briefly below.
178. First, the Notifying Party submits that debt purchasing is a bidding market, and that
     the sophisticated auction processes used by sellers allow them to ensure a good level
     of competition between bidders. In addition, the Notifying Party maintains that a
     seller will compare the offers made for a portfolio purely on the basis of price. The
     Notifying Party therefore submits that the seller will not be influenced by potential
     purchasers’ performance in debt collection, or whether they are even present in debt
     collection in a certain country.
179. The Notifying Party also emphasises that, as a bidding market, debt purchasing
     cannot be analysed on the basis of market shares. The Notifying Party claims that
     (historical) markets shares not necessarily reflect the real competitive position of
     potential purchasers and do not have any bearing on purchasers’ chances of winning
     future tender procedures.
100 The correction factor was calculated in order to account for the tenders in the market the Parties are
    not aware of. The Notifying Party submits that because the Parties are likely to have a better visibility
    on tenders for the larger portfolios, their data are most likely to miss tenders for the smaller debt
    portfolios. Therefore, a correction factor is conservatively applied to the smallest tenders accounting
    for 25% of the face value (i.e. the lowest quartile of tenders). Correction factors (for number of
    tenders and face value) are applied to the bottom 25% segment to obtain the corrected number of
    tenders and face value of the bottom 25%. Therefore, the adjusted total market size is the sum of the
    top 75% segment and the adjusted bottom 25% segment, for number of tenders and face value of
    tenders.
101 The Parties also provided in their submission market shares for the individual years.
102 The consideration expressed in this paragraph and the one above also apply to Germany, the
    Netherlands, and Spain, which will be discussed in their individual assessments.
                                                        38

180. The Notifying party does acknowledge that some portfolios are sold via bilateral
     negotiations rather than through a tender procedure. The Notifying Party maintains,
     nonetheless, that the fact that the seller could, at any moment choose to organise a
     tender for the sale, means that the purchaser is still subject to the threat of
     competition, even if the competition is not yet active on the market.
181. Second, the Notifying Party submits that there are a large number of bidders active
     on the debt purchasing market in each country affected by the Transaction. A seller
     would typically invite 4-5 bidders to compete in a particular tender, but this can be
     increased up to as many as 10 potential purchasers. The Notifying Party maintains
     that, following the Transaction sellers will easily be able to find additional
     purchaser to maintain the same level of competition in the tender process. More
     generally, the Notifying party claim that there are a wider range of actors present in
     debt purchasing in the Nordic markets and Estonia, including Nordic and European
     debt purchasers, investment funds and investment banks. The Notifying Party points
     out that investment funds are particularly active in competing in tenders for sales
     from large financial institutions.
182. The Notifying Party further submits that barriers to entry are low in debt purchasing,
     at least with respect to entry from neighbouring markets. The Notifying Party
     maintains that a debt purchaser’s ability to assess and value a portfolio is not based
     on knowledge specific to the country. Moreover, as the collection on the debt can be
     outsourced, a debt purchaser can compete successfully in a certain market without
     necessarily being present in debt collection. In addition, the Notifying Party also
     submits that debt purchasers already present on a certain market can easily increase
     their activity and start competing for larger portfolios.
183. Third, the Notifying Party claims that the Parties only compete against one another
     in a minority of tenders. The Notifying Party submits that the data on debt
     purchasing tenders known to the Parties, organised in the period 2013-2015 in the
     EEA demonstrate that the Parties only compete against one another in a minority of
     tenders, which would suggest that the Parties are not close competitors. The
     Commission notes that the Notifying Party acknowledged that the Parties were not
     able to ensure the comprehensive matching of tender data, and thus, it is likely that
     not all tenders in which the Parties competed against one another were identified.
     More importantly the Commission notes that, as the Notifying Party admits, an
     important portion of debt sales is organised through bilateral negotiations between
     the seller and the potential bidder, who often is the current collecting agent servicing
     the portfolio to be sold. Taking into account the fact that in all five countries
     concerned the financial institutions constitute the main debt selling market and the
     Parties’ have very strong position on the market for debt collection in the financial
     sectors it is likely that the tender data are not a good indication of the extent to
     which the Parties exert competitive pressure one against another.
184. Fourth, the Notifying Party submits that sellers have considerable negotiating
     power, and that as such, no single buyer, including the merged entity following the
     Transaction, would be able to exercise any form of market power.
185. In summary, the Notifying Party argues that the merged entity’s position in debt
     purchasing would not be such as to harm competition as there would remain a wide
     range of strong competitors active on the market, including both deb collectors and
     investment funds. In addition, debt purchasing is a market where sellers have
     considerable power, meaning that it is highly unlikely that any buyer could exert a
     significant influence on the market.
                                                 39

     Commission’s assessment
186. The Commission’s analysis, including the results of the market investigation, lead to
      the conclusion that competition on the debt purchasing market may not be entirely
      as suggested by the Notifying Party.
187. The results of the market investigation confirmed that debt sales can be concluded
      following either tender procedures or bilateral negotiations, as suggested by the
      Notifying Party. However, whilst the Notifying Party presents the debt purchasing
      market as a “bidding market”, where each tender gives all competitors the same
      chance to compete again and past market shares have little relevance, the views of
      market participants suggested a more nuanced reality.
188. Firstly, the responses from both customers and competitors indicated that sales
      following bilateral negotiations are also very common. Some competitors even win
      most of their business from sales concluded with debt collection clients, where no
      tender is held. Customers also reported selling to the same debt purchaser that has
      purchased their previous portfolios. In view of this, there would appear to be some
      doubt as to the veracity of the Notifying Party’s claim that the fact that the seller
      could hold a tender means that purchasers are still forced to submit competitive
      prices even in sales concluded through bilateral negotiations. When a seller has
      repeatedly sold to either the same debt purchaser or to its debt collection agency, the
      threat of a tender procedure would hardly seem credible.
189. Whilst bilateral negotiations are, therefore, an important part of the market, the
      market investigation did also confirm that, for many sellers, it is standard practice to
      hold tenders. Equally, however, the nature of competitive tenders does not facilitate
      such open competition as suggested by the Notifying Party. Customers are generally
      only prepared to sell to purchasers that meet certain standards, in relation to their
      debt collection practices, reputation and financial stability. They therefore typically
      keep a list of the potential buyers they have already vetted and invite only these
      competitors to compete in any particular tender procedure. This allows sellers to
      compare the bidders mainly on the basis of price, as they know that all the bidders
      meet their required standards. As a result, despite the fact that debt purchasing is a
      bidding market, established players with good reputations and a history of
      purchasing debt portfolios are far more likely to be invited to submit bids for any
      particular sale.
190. In addition to the above, responses to the market investigation contradicted the
      Notifying Party’s argument that debt sellers are indifferent to purchasers’ presence
      and performance in debt collection. The vast majority of customers confirmed that
      the purchaser’s reputation and collection practices are of the utmost importance.
      Sellers are generally of the opinion that any bad practice on the part of the purchaser
      would reflect badly on their company and could have damaging consequences for
      the company’s reputation. Sellers typically continue to regard the debtors as their
      customers, and are therefore only prepared to sell to purchasers that they feel they
      can trust to treat their customers correctly. A significant proportion of customers
      stated that they would only sell to a purchaser that is going to collect on the debt
      itself, rather than outsourcing it to a debt collection agency, as they cannot
      otherwise be sure of the debt collection practices that will be used.103 Contrary to
103 Please see references to the responses to questionnaires in the relevant country-specific sections.
                                                         40

     the Notifying Party’s claim, aspects other than price are therefore very important in
     the debt purchasing market, and established debt collectors with strong reputations
     for good practice, such as Lindorff and Intrum Justitia, are at a considerable
     advantage.
191. The importance of collection practices in sellers’ choice of a debt purchaser also
     confirms once again the strong link between debt collection and debt purchasing.
     The Parties’ strong position in the debt collection market therefore gives them a
     clear advantage over almost all competitors in debt purchasing. Given that the data
     provided by the Notifying Party on debt purchasing is to some extent incomplete (as
     explained above), the Parties’ strong position in debt collection, and in particular in
     debt collection in the financial sector, the sector which accounts for the largest
     proportion of debt sales, can also be seen as a further indication of their strength in
     debt purchasing.
192. The market investigation results in all the five countries revealed that both Lindorff
     and Intrum Justitia enjoy a similarly strong reputation in debt purchasing as in debt
     collection. They are well regarded by customers who value their high standards of
     service, ethical collection practices and high quality platforms and tools, whilst
     competitors also regard them as consistently among the top players, recognising
     similarly their professionalism and experience. The only real difference between the
     characteristics that customers value in the Parties in debt purchasing relative to debt
     collection is that their financial capacity, i.e. their ability to raise capital is also of
     relevance in debt purchasing. This is thus a further criterion on which the Parties
     generally outperform their competitors, particularly as many of the debt collectors
     only present in one or a small number of markets do not have the same levels of
     financing available.
193. It is clear from the responses to the market investigation that the Parties are
     considered to be very similar companies in relation to debt purchasing – they are
     both perceived as strong competitors as a result of their financial capacity and debt
     collection expertise, and both tend to specialise in the financial sector.
194. The results of the market investigation indicate that the number of potential
     purchasers may be much lower than suggested by the Notifying Party. Firstly, as
     mentioned above, customers would almost always only invite bidders that have been
     pre-selected and are reluctant to sell to purchasers that do not have a good reputation
     and standing in the market. Respondents to the market investigation further
     indicated that large financial investors are often more interested in secured rather
     than unsecured debt, and would only consider bidding for portfolios above a certain
     value. Furthermore, many customers would not consider inviting investment funds
     to bid for their portfolios as they know that they are too small to be of interest. In
     addition, sellers’ concern as to how the debtors are treated means that many are
     unwilling to sell to financial investors, or would do so only if the investor is
     purchasing in partnership with a debt collector, which would then collect on the
     debt.
195. According to both customers and competitors, the main actors on the unsecured debt
     purchasing market (which is, in the Nordic markets, the main part of the market) are
     the larger debt collectors. Large financial investors are typically either not interested
     and/or not considered suitable purchasers, whilst smaller debt collectors do not have
     the financial resources necessary to compete for most of the portfolios on sale. The
     number of actors present on the debt purchasing market is therefore, if anything,
     even more limited than in debt collection. Some of the smaller players who may
                                                 41

     exert at least some competitive pressure in debt collection would not have the
     capital to compete in debt purchasing, meaning that sellers have even less choice of
     potential buyers.
196. In addition, the results of the market investigation contradicted the Notifying Party’s
     claim that barriers to entry are low in the debt purchasing market. Respondents
     confirmed that, in order to compete successfully, a debt purchaser needs to have the
     same type of expertise and data as is necessary for debt collection – both in order to
     value the portfolio accurately and, in most cases, in order to be able to collect on the
     debt. This means that, a purchaser that has no activity in debt collection would be at
     a significant disadvantage in performing valuations, as it would have no data
     specific to that market to use as reference portfolios, and many sellers would not
     consider it to be a suitable purchaser, as it would need to outsource debt collection.
197. Furthermore, it is doubtful whether it would be possible for smaller players to
     expand their activity in debt purchasing as easily as suggested by the Notifying
     Party. Even if a small company could engage a consultant to advise on the valuation
     of the portfolio, recruiting sufficient staff to carry out the debt collection would
     represent a significant investment. Even if a company could increase its resources
     sufficiently to manage the cases from additional or larger portfolios, a small
     company would be unlikely to have comparable data to that held by larger players,
     and would thus be at a significant disadvantage in valuing the portfolio and
     performing collection.
198. Moreover, responses to the market investigation suggested that raising finance to
     compete in tenders is not as easy as suggested by the Notifying Party. Many
     customers mentioned the large size of their portfolios as a factor restricting the
     number of possible purchasers they have to choose from. A significant proportion of
     customers and competitors mentioned the Parties’ financial capacity as amongst
     their main strengths in debt purchasing, suggesting that not all competitors have the
     same ability to compete for portfolios as do the Parties.
199. The Notifying Party’s claim that sellers have considerable negotiating power in debt
     sales, and that contracts are generally concluded on their terms would appear to be
     true to a certain extent, and for some competitors. The responses to the market
     investigation confirmed, firstly, that the larger sellers that hold tenders for debt sales
     quite frequently are experienced in the process and have developed their approach to
     debt sales in order to generate sufficient competition, whilst minimising the cost of
     the whole procedure and also ensuring that only purchasers with the right
     credentials are invited to bid. At the same time, however, there are also many
     smaller sellers in the market, that tend to sell to either their debt collector or other
     purchasers with which they have experience, precisely because they do not have
     either experience in holding tenders or the financial resources to either organise a
     tender themselves or enlist the services of a consultant. Furthermore, whilst it may
     be true that sellers usually draft the sales contracts, and can withdraw a portfolio
     from sale if they are not happy with the prices offered, their power is nonetheless
     reduced if there are limited possible purchasers, as is often the case. If the seller has
     chosen to sell a particular portfolio in order to improve its balance sheet, it may not
     be at liberty to wait until market conditions have improved to obtain better price,
     and is thus may, nonetheless, be forced to sell. Sellers’ negotiating power is
     therefore very much dependent on market conditions, and is, in any case, reduced by
     the relatively limited competition on the market, at least for portfolios of above a
     certain value.
                                                  42

200. Lastly, there is very little evidence of sellers sponsoring the entry of new
     competitors, as described by the Notifying Party. Whilst this may have happened in
     a limited number of cases, it is clear that these are isolated incidences rather than
     being representative of a more generally tendency on the market. As such, they
     cannot be considered to make market entry easier in general. As described above,
     barriers to entry are typically very high on the debt purchasing market.
     Conclusion
201. As illustrated by the above arguments, there are a limited number of competitors
     active on the debt purchasing market for unsecured debt, and only a very small
     number that have the same competitive advantages as the Parties – in particular,
     both a strong presence in debt collection and the financial capacity to bid for all
     sizes of portfolio. Furthermore, the strong link between debt collection and debt
     purchasing means that the barriers to entry for debt collection – in particular the
     need for expertise on the local market and large volumes of data, that can only be
     accumulated through historic activity in debt collection – apply equally in debt
     purchasing. The need for high levels of capital in order to bid for portfolios then
     creates an additional barrier to entry in debt purchasing. The Parties have an
     extremely strong position on the debt purchasing market, thanks in part to their
     strength in debt collection, in particular in the financial sector. Very few other
     players are able to compete effectively with them, as they do not have both the same
     reputation and capacity in debt collection and the same financial strength.
202. The market conditions in each of these markets are discussed in more detail in the
     sections below.
                   IV.2.B. Competitive assessment per country
                IV.2.B.1 Finland
IV.2.B.1.1        Finland – Debt collection
203. The Parties hold a combined market share of [50-60]% in the debt collection market
     in Finland, Intrum Justitia being the largest player with [30-40]% and Lindorff the
     second largest player with [20-30]% (2015).104 The next largest competitor is OK
     Perint<U+04D3> with a market share of [10-20]%. No other competitor has a market share of
     above [5-10]%.
104 Market shares were very similar in 2013 and 2014. In 2014, combined shares of [50-60]% (Intrum
    Justitia: [30-40]%; Lindorff: [20-30]%). In 2013, combined shares of [50-60]% (Intrum Justitia: [30-
    40]%; Lindorff: [20-30]%).
                                                      43


205. The Notifying Party acknowledges that the Transaction would combine the top two
     players in third party debt collection in Finland. It argues, however, that the
     Transaction would not significantly impede effective competition in the Finnish
     market.
206. The Notifying Party submits that a number of strong competitors will remain active
     on the market, in particular OK Perint<U+04D3>, Sergel, Trust Kapital Group and Svea. In
     the Notifying Party’s view, these companies are established competitors to the
     Parties and would continue to exert competitive pressure on the combined entity
     following the Transaction.
207. In addition, the Notifying Party submits that switching providers is easy in Finland,
     as services are homogenous, switching costs are low and contracts with debt
     collectors are most often non-exclusive and of short duration (1-2 years). The
     Notifying Party argues that customers often multisource (i.e. work with more than
     one debt collector in parallel) and benchmark the performance of their collection
     providers in order to compare their fees and collection rates. The Notifying Party
     maintains that these aspects are already sufficient to prevent the merged entity from
     raising prices or reducing the quality of its services.
208. Furthermore, the Notifying Party argues that there are no significant barriers to
     entry in the Finnish debt collection market and that there are powerful financial
     incentives to enter the market in view of the relatively high regulated collection
     fees.
209. Lastly, the Notifying Party considers expansion into debt collection from closely
     related areas of activity to be easy and expects the trend of entry from neighbouring
     markets to continue due to the high regulated collection fees.
210. The Commission notes that the Parties’ combined market share of [50-60]% on the
     overall market for debt collection is of itself an indication that the merged entity
     would gain a dominant position on the debt collection market in Finland.
     Furthermore, the Transaction would combine the top two players on the market,
     with market shares of [30-40]% and [20-30]% respectively, while the next largest
     competitor, OK Perint<U+04D3>, would have a market share of [10-20]% and no other
     competitor would have a market share of above [5-10]%. Should the market be
     further segmented according to the customers’ sector of activity, the Parties’
     combined market share would exceed [60-70]% in many sectors (the financial
     sector, utilities and the public sector – in the latter, reaching around [80-90]%). In
     all these sectors, the relevant increment brought by the Transaction would exceed
     [20-30]%.
211. The results of the market investigation reflect the strong position of the Parties. The
     vast majority of customers who responded confirm that the Parties are the top two
     debt collection providers active on the market, and a significant number identify
     Lindorff and Intrum Justitia as the only two providers able to serve their needs.
     These are mainly large customers, which need debt collectors to handle a large
     volume of claims.106 They explain that smaller providers are not able to handle the
106 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q21.
                                                 45

     volume of cases they generate, as they do not have the necessary resources, and that
     Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are the only providers able to meet the needs of large
     companies. Their choice is therefore already very restricted.107 One customer states,
     for example, that “there are only two relevant competitors, Lindorff and Intrum,
     which can offer services for large companies and handle mass volumes.”108
212. The fact that not all debt collection providers active on the Finnish market can serve
     all types of clients is also confirmed by competitors. In particular, smaller providers
     are deemed not to be able to serve large clients due to their lack of expertise,
     adequate IT systems and scale. 109 Moreover, competitors confirmed that starting to
     provide collection services to large clients is a lengthy and costly process (taking up
     to 18 months). Integrating the client and the provider’s systems and transferring data
     both demand significant investment.110
213. All competitors that responded to the market investigation also confirmed that
     Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are the top two competitors on the Finnish market111
     and that they have a particularly strong position in serving large customers112. One
     competitor states, for example, that “Lindorff and Intrum Justitia already have
     practically a duopoly in certain larger customer segments.”113
214. Contrary to the claim made by the Notifying Party, the market investigation
     revealed that switching is not considered to be easy and that customers do not
     change provider often. The majority of customers that responded to the market
     investigation stated that there are a number of obstacles which prevent them from
     switching debt collection providers.114 System integration is the main barrier.
     Although many customers acknowledge that switching would not generate
     significant costs for them, others explain that the cost and additional work created
     by switching provider is not negligible.115 One customer also explains that switching
     would create significant internal disruption and would put the smooth running of the
     collection process at risk.116
215. The results of the market investigation revealed that customers switch very rarely:
     the vast majority of customers who responded to the market investigation have not
     changed their debt collector in the past five years.117
107 “In the Finnish market there are not many options to choose if you like to get a well-known operator.”
    “In Finland [other] debt collectors are normally small companies and they can't handle big business
    like our cases.” “No other provider [apart from the Parties] with sufficient resources exists.”
    Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q13 and Q21.
108 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q21.
109 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q5.
110 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q32.
111 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q12.
112 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q35.
113 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q35.
114 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q12.
115 “Our company has built up connection from our system to Intrum Justitia's system and if that should
    be built up again, it would cost lots of money and time.” Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q12.
116 “From cost perspective, the main burden comes from internally making this happen. This would
    affect both the internal staffing as well as reliability of our invoicing / collecting. It is quite hard to
    estimate this in euros, but for now (after negotiating competitive pricing) the cost of switching is
    deemed too high.” Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q12.
117 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q13.
                                                         46

216. Moreover, the vast majority of customers confirmed that the next time they choose a
     new debt collection provider, the incumbent will have an advantage over other
     providers. In particular, it will have better knowledge of the company and its clients,
     and integrated systems will already be in place.118 Many respondents report that
     putting systems in place with a new provider can take between six months and a
     year. Customers responses also show that IT integration is not the only aspect of
     moving to a new provider to be considered – it also takes time for a new debt
     collector to gain a full understanding of the business.119 Both customers and
     competitors also argue that the time depends on the customer’s size, meaning that
     more time is required for larger customers. While respondents believe the process
     would be relatively quick for small-medium size customers (between a few days and
     a few months), for large companies much more time is required (up to 18
     months).120
217. In addition, switching during a running contract is even more difficult. Competitors
     explain that although customers could theoretically change providers before the end
     of their contract, this is unlikely to happen in practice. Customers may have to pay
     penalty fees to the collection agency and of the need to transfer data for ongoing
     cases would create a significant obstacle. Customers may also be dependent on the
     cooperation of their current provider, which would hold the data on current cases.121
218. Moreover, the market investigation results showed that, when customers do switch
     or look for a new or additional supplier, the Parties often compete for the same
     customers. The vast majority of customers explained that both Lindorff and Intrum
     Justitia have participated in recent tender procedures they held. In some cases, the
     Parties were the only companies competing.122 One customer, for example, explains
     that “we invited Intrum Justitia and Lindorff to bid . . . some of the smaller
     companies did not have all the services that we needed.”123
219. The majority of customers that responded to the questionnaire do not make use of
     multi-sourcing, i.e. do not use multiple providers. Among the small number of
     customers who do multisource, the vast majority use the services of both Lindorff
     and Intrum Justitia. In a few cases customers also have a third provider, which,
     however, plays a very minor role.124 The majority of competitors also confirmed
     that they do not provide services as part of multi-sourcing agreements.125 Market
     participants do not generally consider multi-sourcing to be a standard practice in
     Finland, although it is relatively more common in the financial sector.
220. Nearly all customers that responded to the market investigation perceive Lindorff
     and Intrum as each other’s closest competitors. Many customers do not mention any
     other competitor in Finland that can be considered a close competitor to either one
     of the two companies. Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are generally perceived as the
118 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q14.
119 “[It will take] 6 months, but this would only mean from system perspective. For a service provider to
    get really inside our business (and system challenges) an estimate of an additional 6 months is
    needed.” Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q12.
120 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q32, Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q12.
121 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q33.
122 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q9.
123 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q9.
124 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q6.
125 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q28.
                                                      47

     only companies of their size and capacity.126 The vast majority of competitors also
     identify the Parties as each other’s closest competitors. A small number of other
     competitors are also mentioned as close competitors to the Parties - OK Perint<U+04D3>,
     Svea, Ropo Group (former Trust Kapital) and Sergel, but only by a small number of
     respondents. Both Parties are perceived as strong players with good data, processes,
     reputation and scale, and that are able to provide a full range of CMS. Moreover,
     both are considered to be strong in servicing large clients.127
221. Contrary to the Notifying Party’s claims, the majority of competitors that responded
     to the market investigation do not expect any new providers to enter the Finnish
     market in the near future.128 Moreover, competitors explain that entering new
     segments within the debt collection market is not necessarily easy. Certain sectors,
     such as the financial sector and the public sector, are seen as being very difficult to
     enter due to the skills and resources required to compete effectively, namely proven
     experience, capital and advanced IT systems. It is generally accepted that the normal
     and fastest way to expend operational capabilities is via acquisition, which also
     involves a significant investment.129
222. The vast majority of respondents believe that the Transaction will have a negative
     impact on the Finnish debt collection market. Customers expect there to be a
     significantly reduced choice of providers (leaving almost no choice for larger
     customers), increases in prices and a reduction in the quality of services offered.130
     One customer explains that “there are only two providers in the Finnish market
     today . . . competition will be reduced, and [there could be an] impact on pricing,
     services, etc. It will probably increase the provider’s power from a
     customer/provider perspective.”131
223. A number of respondents were also concerned that the type of service packages
     offered may change132 Even if the merged entity would not be able to increase the
     debtors’ fees that are set by law, 133 the Parties could still raise prices by combining
     debt collection with other CMS for which a commission (not regulated by law) is
     paid. A competitor noted that
     “The Transaction will probably not affect directly debt collection pricing since it is
     regulated, but can affect the pricing of whole contract if other services are included.
     The Transaction will lead to a situation where the [merged] company will have a
     dominant market position, and it will be in the position to set the pricing and
     services offered in the market.”134
126 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q15-20.
127 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q13-14.
128 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q31.
129 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q5.
130 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q28.
131 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q28.
132 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q28.
133 The Notifying Party submits that debt collection fees charged to a debtor for consumer debts are
    regulated by law, while debt collection fees for business debts are not regulated at present.
134 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q34.
                                                        48


     a selected group of purchasers to submit bids in the context of selling debt
     portfolios. Moreover, a number of customers explain they actually engage into
     bilateral negotiation, typically with their debt collection provider. 138 Competitors
     also confirmed that tenders usually consist of invitations to a selected number of
     market participants to submit bids.139 A few competitors explain that organising
     tenders for debt purchasing in Finland is not very common, with the exception of
     the financial sector and possibly the telecom sector where this practice is somewhat
     more common.140
230. The link between debt collection and debt purchasing is strongly confirmed by the
     market investigation. The majority of customers responding to the questionnaire
     believe that the ability to perform debt collection is perceived as an important
     requirement for debt purchasers.141 Even if evidence regarding sellers’ preference to
     sell portfolios to their current debt collector is mixed, many respondents actually
     recognise that selling a debt portfolio to the incumbent collector is more convenient,
     especially in relation to the ease of transferring data.142 Moreover, a significant
     portion of sellers confirmed that they happened to sell their portfolios to their debt
     collection provider at the time of the sale.143 Competitors responding to the market
     investigation also confirmed that a high portion (up to 70% both in terms of number
     of sales and value of the portfolios) of debt they purchase is originated from
     customers served in debt collection.144 Respondents also believe that a company that
     uses a debt collection agency is more likely to sell its portfolios to this agency.145
     For example, one competitor explains that:
     “Typically, (third party) debt collection providers are in favour of buying those
     portfolios from both the selling-party side as well as from an internal, operational
     point-of-view. The selling party has already established a relationship, is
     experienced about the level of compliance (prevents from potential reputational
     damages if a provider is not behaving accordingly) and available reporting. The
     buy-side provider can leverage the data from the portfolio which helps significantly
     to evaluate the portfolio and guarantees a very high certain forecast about its
     profitability. Moreover, there are few start-up costs such as implementing
     workflows, processes and training staff, which makes it easier and cheaper to sell to
     the debt collection supplier which is already servicing the portfolio. All in all, the in
     place debt collection supplier has significant advantages against other external
     players.”146
231. A significant majority of responding sellers also believe that companies who have
     internal databases (e.g. data gathered through other debt purchases and/or debt
     collection activities) are better placed to value portfolios on sale.147 Contrary to
     what is argued by the Notifying Party, the data provided by the seller is not
138 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q30.
139 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q68.
140 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q68.
141 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q36.
142 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q39.
143 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q40.
144 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q49.
145 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q50.
146 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q50.
147 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q42.
                                                 50

      sufficient on its own to allow a debt purchaser to accurately value the portfolios on
      sale.148 The necessary data cannot be acquired on the market off-the-shelf, since
      specific knowledge, especially related to the debt collection process, is needed.149
232. Furthermore, debt sellers who want to sell their debt portfolios to a company which
      is not their incumbent debt collection provider may incur in penalties and additional
      costs.150 Competitors responding to the market investigation have also confirmed
      that it is easier for customers to sell debt to their current debt collector and that there
      are obstacles to selling debt to other purchasers. For example, one competitor
      explains that “It is much easier to sell to a provider who is handling the debt
      collection activities based on the price/fee structure used in debt collection in
      Finland. In some cases it can even be an obstacle to sell to some other provider.”151
233. However, only a limited number of players active in debt collection are able to
      compete for larger debt portfolios, since not all of them have sufficient capital
      requirements. This means that the choice of debt purchasers is potentially even more
      limited than the choice of debt collectors. One competitor clearly explains this
      concept, stating that:
      “There is synergy between the debt collection and debt (portfolio) purchasing
      wherefore capability to be active player in both businesses improves the
      performance of both businesses. Debt purchasing requires however significant
      capital for initial debt acquisitions, special knowledge and insight on debt and
      debtor rating and risk analysis and is therefore possible only for the largest players
      in the market.”152
234. The Notifying Party claims that there are numerous active bidders exerting strong
      competitive pressure in the debt purchasing market, including international
      investment companies. Contrary to this claim, the market investigation revealed that
      the vast majority of responding sellers do not consider international private equity
      firms or asset management companies as suitable buyers.153 In Finland, nearly all
      sellers consider either Lindorff or Intrum Justitia as their preferred buyer for debt
      portfolios. Among these, about half considers the Parties as the only suitable buyers
148  “[..] it is left to the debt collection provider to draw statistical comparisons from other portfolios
     which have the same characteristics. This specific data is hardly replicable due to the different
     circumstances and recovery performances of every provider.”
“Data gathered during debt collection is crucial and gives advantage in evaluation [of debt portfolios].
     They are not complementary since debt collection data is by far more important than data provided by
     seller. Generally the information provided by seller is included in the data that collector has.”
     Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q69-70.
149 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q69.
150 “[…] it is very complex or nearly impossible to sell debt to other corporate as where the debts are in
     collection (legislation, debt collectors costs).”
     “We see that if we would use some other company to sell those invoices it would be more difficult
     and also current debt [collection] company should give their permission to sell to other companies.”
     Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q30 and Q39.
151 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q50.
152 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q3, Q 56 : “Having strong financial backings from
     shareholders Lindorff was able to buy significantly into portfolios which were able to subsidize debt
     collection businesses and enabled scale for further growth. Therefore Lindorff has gathered a valuable
     data asset which most other players do not have.”
153 “Collection companies are [the] most suitable [buyers].” Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10,
     Q38.
                                                         51

     for their debt portfolios. Only a minority of respondents mention as suitable
     purchasers PRA, Arvato, OK Perintä, Sergel, and Svea. 154
235. All competitors responding to the market investigation have also confirmed that
     Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are the top two players in the market. Other top
     competitors mentioned by at least two respondents are OK Perintä and Arvato.155
     Thus, the number of players in the market is rather limited. No competitor mentions
     international investment companies among the top five competitors active in the
     country.156
236. All sellers responding to the questionnaire have identified Lindorff and Intrum
     Justitia as closest competitors, in particular due to their size and capacity to buy
     large portfolios. The majority of these respondents have also identified Lindorff as
     the only close competitor to Intrum Justitia and vice versa.157 In general, sellers
     perceive both Parties as experienced companies, with good reputation, good offering
     and extensive datasets.158 Furthermore, when sellers specify which companies have
     participated in their most recent tenders, the Parties are always both present.159 Also
     competitors responding to the market investigation have identified the Parties as
     each other’s closest competitor. Both companies are described as large in size and
     with extensive databases that they can leverage from debt collection. 160 For example
     one competitor mentions among the Parties’ main strengths the fact that they have
     “massive internal data and knowledge based on third party debt collection.”161 A
     significant portion of responding competitors mention that when competing in
     tenders for debt portfolios, they frequently meet both Parties.162
237. The vast majority of sellers who responded to the market investigation believe that
     the Transaction will have a negative impact on the debt purchasing market,
     especially in terms of reduced competition and possible price drops in offers to
     sellers.163 For example, one seller says “As two of the largest players (from our
     perspective) in this field, and with only a handful of other competitors, this [merger]
     might affect the pricing in the future.”164 Another seller claims that:
     “They [the Parties] are probably the two biggest players on this field. They both
     have extensive data and combined it will be a monster. Combined they will have a
     very clear visibility for prices that has been paid on winning portfolios. They will be
     very difficult to compete with by other purchase providers. Most probably is
     someone else will win tenders, they will offer too much.”165
154 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q37.
155 “Based on our experience in the Finnish DP market, there is a fairly limited amount of active players
    in the market.” Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q52 and Q54.
156 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q60.
157 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q45.
158 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q45 and 46.
159 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q33.
160 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q56.
161 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q51.
162 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q65.
163 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q51.
164 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q51.
165 Customers, Finland – Questionnaire 10, Q51.
                                                     52

238. The negative impact of the Transaction on the debt purchasing market is also
     confirmed by competitors responding to the market investigation. Competitors
     believe that the Parties already have a very strong position on the market and
     together they will hold a dominant position, also leveraging their activities in debt
     collection. This could negatively affect the prices they offer to debt sellers, who
     would also have a much reduced choice of potential buyers for their portfolios.166
     for example, one competitor explains that:
     “If the transaction will happen, it will give more dominant market position to the
     Company. Intrum Justitia and Lindorff as separate companies are already having
     marker leader positions today and after the transaction the position would be even
     stronger.”167 “Given the fact that usually the debt collector wins the DP [Debt
     Purchase] deal, the merged company will have huge advantage in the debt
     purchasing market. They together will have a far superior database compared to any
     other competitor in the market.”168 Another competitor explains that: “[the merged
     entity] would be in a position where they can price more efficiently and avoid
     negative risks, and in the long term some providers will drop out from the
     competition. This could eventually mean higher costs to the clients.”169
239. In conclusion, the Commission considers that taking into account the strong link
     between debt collection and debt purchase, and the fact that the Transaction raises
     competition concerns on the debt collection market in Finland could already give
     grounds to concerns with regard to the debt purchasing market. The high market
     shares of the Parties confirm that further and the market investigation results reveal
     that indeed the Parties are the two largest players on the debt purchasing market in
     Finland with limited number of alternative players, especially for larger portfolios.
240. In view of the above the Commission considers that the Transaction gives rise to
     serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in relation to the
     market for debt purchasing in Finland.
              IV.2.B.2 Norway
IV.2.B.2.1      Norway - Debt collection
241. The Parties have a combined market share of [30-40]% in debt collection in
     Norway. Lindorff is the current market leader with [20-30] % whilst Intrum Justitia
     is a somewhat smaller player with [5-10]% market share (2015).170 The strongest
     competitor to the merged entity would be Kredinor, with a market share of [10-
     20]%. No other competitors have above [5-10]% market share.
166 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q72.
167 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q72.
168 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q73.
169 Competitors, Finland – Questionnaire 2, Q73.
170 Market shares were very similar in 2013 and 2014: 2014: [30-40]% with an increment of [5-10]%
    brought by Intrum Justitia; 2013: [20-30]% with an increment of [5-10]% brought by Intrum Justitia.
                                                      53


243. By way of introduction, the Notifying Party mentions that the worsening
     macroeconomic environment in Norway, is likely to increase demand for debt
     collection in the coming years. The Notifying Party points out that a number of new
     competitors have entered the market, and it expects to see further market entries.
244. The Notifying Party submits that the Parties have only a modest combined market
     share in Norway, and that the merged entity would continue to face strong
     competition from many competitors, including in particular Kredinor, the current
     number two in the market. It adds that the debt collection market in Norway is
     highly competitive and fragmented, with around 100 registered providers active.
245. The Notifying Party further argues that the Parties are not seen as particularly close
     competitors in Norway, and that Kredinor, Arvato and Sergel are all seen as closer
     competitors to Lindorff, the current market leader.
246. The Notifying Party emphasises that customers can switch suppliers easily, and that
     both the practice of sourcing suppliers via tenders and of using benchmarking
     between multiple suppliers mean that the merged entity will remain under strong
     competitive pressure. The Notifying Party states that debt collection contracts are
     usually of 1-3 years duration, and do not, in general, include exclusivity clauses.172
     It maintains that clients can therefore multisource, and can easily switch suppliers if
     they are unhappy with one of their providers.
247. The Notifying Party further argues that debt collection customers have significant
     buyer power. In its view, they have a large number of credible suppliers to choose
     from, and are at liberty to switch between suppliers. Furthermore, the use of tenders
     to choose providers means that they will typically receive a number of competitive
     offers. The practice of benchmarking (as mentioned above) allows customers to
     measure their debt collection providers against one another, thus increasing
     competition.
248. Lastly, the Notifying Party submits that it is quick and easy to obtain a debt
     collection licence in Norway, the main requirements being for the company to be
     registered in Norway, and for the main personnel to be suitable and qualified to run
     the business. It reports that former staff of large players on the market have
     successfully set up their own businesses and can easily recruit colleagues with the
     necessary expertise. In addition, it submits that benchmarking exercises can help
     new players to enter the market, as customers are often prepared to allocate a small
     percentage of their debt cases to an unknown provider, whilst they would be less
     likely to engage a party with which they have no experience for the entire contract.
     Entering the debt collection market from neighbouring CMS markets is also a
     possible strategy for entry, in the Notifying Party’s view.
249. The results of the market investigation confirmed Lindorff’s status as market leader,
     and also showed that Intrum Justitia is perceived to be a much stronger player than
     would be suggested by the market shares. The majority of customers rated Lindorff
     as number one in the market. Those that didn’t almost always named Intrum Justitia,
     whilst no customers regarded Kredinor as a market leader. Overall, Intrum Justitia
     was ranked significantly more often amongst customers’ top five debt collection
172 The Notifying Party does, however, acknowledge that there may be exclusivity clauses for smaller
    collection contracts.
                                                  55

     providers than was Kredinor, with Visma (the number three in the market according
     to the market shares provided by the Notifying Party) barely recognised by
     customers.173 Lindorff and Intrum Justitia were also invited to compete in tenders
     significantly more often than any other providers.174
250. For competitors, Lindorff is also the clear market leader, with all respondents
     naming it as the number one debt collection provider. Unlike customers, however,
     competitors unanimously ranked Kredinor as the next strongest competitor, with
     Intrum Justitia third. Visma, the third-placed competitor according to the market
     shares provided by the Notifying Party, was mentioned less often, and typically
     lower ranked, whilst other competitors were only mentioned occasionally.175 Even if
     competitors typically rank Kredinor above Intrum Justitia, the general picture of the
     competitive landscape is still very different to that suggested by the market shares:
     competitors see Lindorff, Kredinor and Intrum Justitia (in that order) as the three
     major players on the market, with other competitors not in the same class.
     Competitors also reported meeting both the Parties in over 50% of tenders.176
251. The results of the market investigation therefore give a very strong indication that
     Intrum Justitia’s position on the Norwegian market is much stronger than suggested
     by its market share. The Parties appear to be a clear number one and number two on
     the market in customers’ minds, and number one and three for competitors. There is
     a clear top three of Lindorff, Kredinor and Intrum Justitia, followed, at some
     distance, by a small group of other second-tier competitors, such as Arvato, Sergel
     and Svea. The very large number of other competitors referred to by the Notifying
     Party clearly do not exert any competitive pressure on the major players such as
     Lindorff and Intrum Justitia.
252. Lindorff has a very good reputation amongst customers in the Norwegian market
     and is generally regarded as a professional and trustworthy provider, with good
     technical solutions, skilled employees and good relationships with customers.177
     Customers also value the range of services that Lindorff offers in addition to
     collection services.178 Only a small number of customers identify weaknesses,
     which mainly related to a perceived lack of flexibility and a reluctance to adapt to
     individual customer’s needs. Some saw these characteristics as being a consequence
     of its size and market-leading position. Other customers, meanwhile, stated that
     Lindorff was flexible and responded appropriately to customers’ needs.179
253. Competitors also commented on Lindorff’s reputation and expertise. Its strengths, as
     perceived by competitors, cover almost all the criteria of relevance to debt
     collection: it has industry expertise and high volumes of market data, it benefits
     from its size and scale, it is part of an international group and is present across
173 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q21.2.
174 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q9.1.1.
175 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q12.
176 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q26.
177 “Professional actor in the marked. Largest player. Good reputation in terms of quality and
    professionalism.” Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q15.
    “Professional, experienced, has sufficient and well-trained staff, sophisticated systems with many
    integrations to standard ERP systems.” Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q16.1.
178 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q15-16
179 “[Lindorff is] willing to adopt changes and listening to us as a customer when we request changes.”
    Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q15.
                                                       56

     Europe, and it enjoys a good reputation in the market. Similarly to customers, a
     minority of competitors also saw Lindorff’s size as a potential weakness, in view of
     the risk of losing touch with customers and becoming too inflexible.180
254. The vast majority of customers named Intrum Justitia as Lindorff’s closest
     competitor in Norway. They mentioned the similar size and comparable recovery
     rates of the two companies. The next closest competitor was generally considered to
     be Kredinor, with other providers only being mentioned occasionally, suggesting
     that only Intrum Justitia and Kredinor are generally seen as real alternatives to
     Lindorff.181 Competitors, meanwhile, typically named Kredinor as Lindorff’s
     closest competitor, with Intrum Justitia second.182
255. Customers’ overall perception of Intrum Justitia is very similar to that of Lindorff.
     They see Intrum Justitia as a professional and reputable service provider, which
     offers reasonable prices, good customer service and IT tools.183 Intrum Justitia is
     also seen as being a flexible provider, which is able and willing to tailor its solutions
     to individual customers’ needs.184 Customers also valued Intrum Justitia’s
     international presence. A minority of customers stated, however, that Intrum
     Justitia’s technology is not up-to-date and that its systems are inefficient. One also
     questioned its market knowledge in Norway.
256. Competitors generally viewed Intrum Justitia as a strong, international provider,
     with high standards of customer service, high quality tools and competitive prices.
     Intrum Justitia’s size was also mentioned as an advantage, as was its ability to
     provide a broad range of services, covering all aspects of CMS and factoring. At the
     same time, however, some competitors felt that Intrum Justitia’s size could become
     a possible weakness – the same concern as expressed in relation to Lindorff. In
     addition, some competitors voiced similar views as customers in relation to Intrum
     Justitia’s technology, which they see as outdated.185
257. Customers’ responses indicated that they see Lindorff as by far the closest
     competitor to Intrum Justitia. Kredinor was also mentioned as next closest
     competitor by a significant proportion of respondents, but other competitors were
     named by only a minority of respondents. Considering these responses together with
     the views on Lindorff’s closest competitors, it is clear that customers regard
     Lindorff and Intrum Justitia as each other’s closest competitors, with Kredinor some
     way further behind. Other competitors are not generally considered to be close
     competitors to either of the Parties.
258. Competitors, meanwhile, also consistently ranked Lindorff as Intrum Justitia’s
     closest competitor and Kredinor as second closest.186 Overall, therefore,
180 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q13.
181 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q17.
182 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q13.
183 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q18-19.
    “They are an international brand, professional and easy to work with.” “Very good relationship
    between our customer services and personnel in Intrum Justitia. Very good web tool, good prices and
    a good reputation. Good experience with our products and market.”
184 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q19.1. “Professional, serious, adaptive to unique customer
    needs.”
185 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q13.
186 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q14.
                                                     57

     competitors’ views on the closeness of competition between the Parties would seem
     to tie in with their ranking of the top three on the market: they see Lindorff as a
     clear market leader, followed by Kredinor and then Intrum Justitia. As such,
     Kredinor is Lindorff’s closest competitor, as it is next highest ranked, and Lindorff
     is Intrum Justitia’s closest competitor, being the market leader. This confirms again
     that the Parties and Kredinor are the three main players on the market, with other
     providers having a lesser influence on competition.
259. A significant proportion of customers confirmed that it is not easy for them to
     switch suppliers. The main reasons mentioned were contractual issues, in particular
     ‘lock-in’ clauses, and the extra expense that would be created by having to integrate
     their systems with a new provider.187 The fact that the current provider already has
     this integration in place, and has already established certain procedures with the
     customer mean that it is much more convenient and less costly for the customer not
     to switch.188 In addition, many customers expect the existing provider to be able to
     achieve better results in future compared to a new provider, as it will benefit from
     the knowledge on a particular customer’s claims that it has built up over time.189
     Switching provider is also generally seen as a fairly lengthy exercise – customers’
     estimates as to the time it would take to have systems in place with a new provider
     vary considerably, but some thought it could be as long as 6-12 months.190 A large
     majority of customers stated that the current provider will have an advantage when
     the contract next comes up for renewal.191 This is also due to customers’ wish to
     avoid reputational risk. If they know and trust their current provider, they are
     unwilling to take the risk of trying out an alternative, even if the price might be
     slightly better.192 This type of behaviour on the part of customers creates a genuine
     barrier to entry as it makes it very difficult for new entrants, or existing but smaller
     players, to gain market share, even if the incumbent players underperform.
260. Customer’s reluctance to change providers is borne out by the actual switching
     rates: around half of customers who responded to the market investigation had not
     changed debt collection provider at all during the last five years, and, of those which
     had switched provider, the vast majority had only changed once.193 Responses from
     competitors also suggested that switching could be very time-consuming, especially
     for large clients with more complex or larger volumes of cases. Competitors
     explained that it could take up to a year and a half for them to integrate their
     systems with those of a new client.194
261. Customers’ responses to the market investigation confirmed that they do choose to
     hold tenders in the majority of cases, but there were also a significant proportion of
187 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q12. “A collection agency always wants to get paid in full
    (no matter whether collections are successful or not), which means it's often impossible to switch
    provider.”
188 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q12.
189 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q14.1. “Its unique insight and information on our claims and
    processes gives our existing provider an advantage over external, less well informed providers.”
190 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q12.2.
191 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q14.
192 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q14.1. “We know their systems and the contact persons we
    have at their company. They have a good knowledge of our business model and of the type of
    customers we have, and how to handle them.”
193 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q13.
194 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q32-33.
                                                      58

     respondents that had entered into contracts without holding a tender, i.e. based on an
     offer from only one provider.195 Competitors were of the opinion that larger
     customers with significant volumes of debt cases would typically hold tenders, but
     that medium-sized or smaller companies would be more likely to negotiate with one
     player only.196 Where customers do organise tenders, they are usually quite
     restrictive in their choice of participants, preferring to invite providers they have
     experience with or that have a certain reputation and status on the market.197 The
     way in which sales are concluded, i.e. via private arrangements or following closed
     tenders, therefore puts established players at an even stronger advantage, and makes
     it very difficult for smaller or newer players to compete.
262. Contrary to the Notifying Party’s claim, the vast majority of customers that
     responded to the market investigation do not think it would be possible or desirable
     for them to start performing debt collection in-house again. The vast majority of
     customers explain that this would not be feasible, due to the investment that would
     be required and the time it would take to have an in-house system.198 Starting
     performing collection in-house would require, in particular a large scale
     reorganisation internally, purchasing and maintenance of new IT systems,
     consultation with legal advisors and recruitment and training of new specialised
     staff.199 The very reason for which many customers have outsourced debt collection
     in the first place is that they do not have the necessary expertise or resources
     internally, and external collection is therefore considered more efficient and cost-
     effective.200 The effective absence of the option to perform debt collection in-house
     indicates that buyer power is significantly less strong than suggested by the
     Notifying Party,
263. Responses from Norwegian customers provided some evidence that the number of
     providers able to serve large customers is very limited. A number of customers
     noted that only the larger providers would be able to meet their needs, partly due to
     capacity, and partly due to their preference for debt collection providers that also
     offer other CMS.201 Some customers are worried that smaller debt collection
     agencies won’t be able to handle their volumes of claims effectively, or won’t have
     the necessary technical sophistication.202 Customers therefore feel reassured by a
195 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q9.
196 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q27.
197 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q10.
198 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q27.1.
    “We do not have the competencies and will not prioritise this task in-house. Increased prices would be
    charged to our customers.”
199 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q27.1.1. [Steps to be taken:] “recruiting staff, investing in IT
    systems/infrastructure, training staff, maintaining systems, working with a legal firm, setting up
    investigation units etc. I would estimate min one year before up and running.”
200 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q5.
201 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q10.1. “We are a large customer for a collection agency, so
    we do not want to use a small collection agency.” “We use a debt collector for purposes other than
    ordinary collection as well. (…) we also use this provider to run quality checks on our portfolios in
    order to improve the granting of new credits. Such analyses will be of better quality if they are run by
    an agency with a high collection market share within the products we are selling. So size is important
    for us.”
202 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q10.1.
                                                       59

     provider that they know to be one of the biggest on the market.203 In addition, many
     of the smaller debt collection agencies do not provide additional services, or do not
     offer all stages of the debt collection value chain, e.g. in particular legal collection.
     This is important for many customers that wish to outsource all aspects of debt
     collection,204 and/or other CMS.205 Customers’ preference for larger providers thus
     reveals that the competitive pressure exerted by the numerous smaller players is
     much less significant than claimed by the Notifying Party.
264. Competitors also confirmed that not all debt collection agencies in Norway would
     be able to serve all customers. In particular, the requirements for serving large,
     international customers would exclude many smaller providers from this area of the
     market. Competitors emphasised the importance of offering services at all points of
     the value chain, and of having systems that can handle large volumes of claims.206
     Dealing with large volumes of cases quickly and efficiently is seen as being very
     challenging for smaller companies. Some competitors explained that only debt
     collection companies with presence in other countries would be able to serve
     customers which trade internationally. Given the criteria for serving large,
     international customers, Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are clearly well qualified to
     meet these needs, whilst many of the other competitors on the Norwegian market do
     not have the necessary scale or international presence.
265. In addition to the above, a small number of customers also mentioned that they are
     currently looking to standardise their debt collection outsourcing across the Nordic
     region and Estonia, and are therefore looking for a single debt collection provider
     that can meet their needs across this region.207 The pool of competitors which could
     do this is therefore much smaller than the number of competitors active in Norway.
     In particular, Kredinor, which would be the strongest competitor to the merged
     entity, the only other player with a market share over [10-20]%, and the only other
     player seen as a realistic alternative to the Parties by most customers, is only active
     in Norway and would therefore not come into consideration for this customer, or
     any others wishing to find a debt collection provider which can serve their needs
     across a number of markets.
266. Contrary to the Notifying Party’s claim, competitors consider that barriers to entry
     are very high in the Norwegian market. In their view, it would be very difficult for a
     new company to start competing on the market without local knowledge, as this is
     essential both for valuing and collecting on portfolios. Regulatory requirements
     were also considered to create a barrier to entry.208 One competitor explained that,
203 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q10.1. “In this type of industry it´s important to work with
    the serious players on the market. Therefore it´s always better to work with some of the very big ones,
    because they don´t want to risk their reputation.”
204 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q10.1.
205 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q10.1.
206 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q5. “For large customers we have to have a system that can
    handle a big amount of claims.” “A large customer automatically demands more manpower, IT
    capacity, closer follow up.”
207 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q14.1. “We are working on the harmonisation of all our
    collection processes . . . part of this harmonisation process will be to request collection services from
    one collection agency for the whole region. We will choose the collection provider with the best
    solution and prices for the region as a whole.”
208 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q10-11.
                                                         60

     as a result, entry almost always comes about through the acquisition of a smaller
     player already active on the market, rather than through organic growth.209
267. A significant minority of customers expressed concern about the Transaction in
     respect of the debt collection market.210 They explained that the Parties are two of
     the largest players on the Norwegian market, and that losing one will therefore
     undoubtedly have an impact.211 One customer mentioned that the Parties have often
     been in competition with each other for its debt collection contract, and that the loss
     of one of the two will certainly be felt on the market.212 Another customer stated
     that for customers wishing to work with a large debt collection agency, there will no
     longer be any choice at all.
268. One customer was in favour of the Transaction, and explained that it would allow
     them to benefit from the best aspects of both providers’ services. Although this
     customer uses the combined strengths of the two companies to argue for the merger,
     this opinion again shows that the Parties are considered to be the best providers on
     all criteria. This customer sees a combination of Lindorff and Intrum Justitia as a
     company that could offer “the best systems combined with the best people, attitude
     and pricing”213. It also emphasises the attractiveness of the merger in terms of
     creating one provider that could serve them equally well across the Nordic region.214
     Both these arguments indicate the competitive advantage that the merged entity
     would have over all other competitors, which would not be able to match this all-
     round strength and geographic presence.
269. While some competitors indicate that the Transaction would have no impact on the
     market, some submit that the Transaction would have an impact mainly in that the
     merged entity would be in a class of its own in terms of size, holding a very large
     market share.215 According to competitors this would allow it to exert considerable
     influence over the debt collection market, potentially leading to price rises. As
     explained by one of competitors: “The combined entity will establish a new league
     of provider which will reduce the mobility in the market as some segments will only
     have one provider. All in all we estimate more than [60-70]% of the market to relate
     to the combined entity - de-facto shaping the future of the debt collection and also
     debt purchasing market in Norway.”216 Furthermore, it is expected that the merged
     entity would be the only provider on some segments of the market, such as utilities
     leading to a dangerous monopoly situation.217 Competitors also emphasise that
209 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q10.2.
210 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q28.
211 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q28. “Two already super big collection agencies that will
    merge? Of course it will have a HUGE impact on the market.”
212 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q51.1, Q28.1. “One less competitor when it comes to
    general service providers. Lindorff and Intrum have typically competed quite intensely to secure us as
    a client when we tender for general debt collection services.”
213 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q29.
214 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q25.”Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are strong in different
    countries in the Nordic markets, and the merger would allow customers to have the same provider in
    all countries, without ever having to take the second best provider in any market.”
215 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q34.
216 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q73.1.1.
217 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q34.1”More aggressive prices. Monopoly on certain sectors
    – e.g. public sector, health and utilities.”
                                                        61


     more active player on the market than its market share by value might suggest.220
     The Parties are stronger overall in debt purchasing than in debt collection, possibly
     reflecting their strength in debt collection for the financial sector, where the largest
     clients for debt purchasing are typically found.
274. The Norwegian debt purchasing market is characterised by a preference for one-off
     sales over forward-flow agreements. Debt sellers typically perform an internal
     assessment of the overdue debts that have accumulated every couple of years, and
     then decide whether it would be advantageous to sell the debt portfolios rather than
     continuing to hold them on the company’s balance sheet. Sales are therefore fairly
     infrequent (from a seller’s perspective) and dependent on market conditions.221
275. The market investigation showed that debt purchasing is a fairly concentrated
     market. Customers named a fairly small group of potential debt purchasers, most of
     which are also active in debt collection. These include, in addition to the Parties,
     Conecto (SpareBank 1), Svea, Kredinor and Collector. B2 Holding and PRA Group,
     which are not active in debt collection in Norway, are also named by some debt
     sellers as possible bidders.222 Debt purchasers are generally thought to be interested
     in all types of portfolio, although it is recognised that some of the debt collection
     companies may not be able to compete for larger portfolios.
276. The responses from competitors generally confirmed the views of customers. Just
     over half of respondents (all of which are active in debt collection in Norway) are
     also active in debt purchasing. As seen across the Nordic markets, debt purchasers
     are mainly focused on unsecured debt. A number of competitors in Norway
     specialise to some extent in financial sector debt, as this is seen as the most
     profitable area.223
277. Most potential debt sellers organise tender procedures when they decide to sell a
     certain portfolio. They are typically very cautious in choosing the participants to
     invite, and will carry out thorough analysis before including a potential buyer in a
     tender procedure. In particular, sellers in Norway are keen to have assurance that the
     bidders have good reputations and only employ the best debt collection practices.
     They see this as important in terms of protecting their own companies’ reputations
     and avoiding any bad publicity.
278. Only a very small minority of Norwegian customers think that international private
     equity funds or asset management firms would be suitable buyers for their debt
     portfolios.224 The main reason for sellers’ reluctance to sell to this type of buyer is
     the importance of best practice in debt collection and of knowledge and expertise
220 In addition, the proportion of tenders won by each Party in each of the years (based on an uncorrected
    market size) also shows that market shares vary considerably from year to year. Intrum Justitia won
    less than [0-5]% of known tenders by value in 2015, but [30-40]% in 2014, whilst Lindorff won [10-
    20]% (by value) in 2014, and [50-60]% in 2016. The percentage won by each of the Parties by
    number of tenders also varies over the three year period.
221 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q31 “High level capital assessments trigger potential sales
    processes. We monitor the accumulation of non-performing loans (NPLs) to decide if volumes are
    sufficient for a potential sale or not.”, “The bank sells debt portfolios after an internal assessment.
    There are several years between the sales of portfolios.”
222 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q34.1.
223 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q37-38.
224 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q38.
                                                        63

     relating to the seller’s area of business.225 A number of customers point out that it is
     more difficult for them to check the credentials of larger investment firms and to be
     sure that their customers will be treated well. Responses from competitors generally
     confirmed that such firms are active as buyers on the debt purchasing market in
     Norway, but that they would often bid in partnership with a debt collector.226
279. The market investigation strongly confirmed the presence in Norway of the same
     link between debt collection and debt purchasing as seen in the Nordic region in
     general. First, the vast majority of customers confirm that they would have a
     preference for selling to their current debt collector. They mention, in particular,
     that this makes the selling process much simpler and less costly, as details on the
     receivables have already been transferred and the debt collection provider has
     already passed all the necessary compliance checks.227 One customer also explained
     that the incumbent debt collection provider may be able to hold back information on
     their collection on the portfolio to date, meaning that the seller cannot provide other
     potential bidders with the information they would need to make an accurate
     valuation. This effectively traps the seller and prevents them from getting any
     competitive offers from other potential purchasers.228 Another customer also
     regarded the debt collection provider’s prior knowledge of the portfolio as an
     advantage.
280. Customers’ responses demonstrated that most, whilst acknowledging the advantages
     of selling to their debt collector, do hold tender procedures for the sale of their debt
     portfolios.229 The simplicity and lower cost of selling to the debt collection provider
     still, however, weighs heavily in their final decision – one customer mentioned that
     if the prices submitted by other bidders were similar, they would still favour their
     current provider, and another stated that the price would need to be significantly
     better (i.e. at least 25% higher), which in their experience is very rarely the case, for
     them to consider selling to another purchaser.230 The only disadvantage of selling to
     the current debt collection provider mentioned by customers in Norway was that
     there might be less room for negotiation once an offer has been submitted. This may
     reflect the fact that the current debt collection provider is able to produce a more
     accurate valuation, and is therefore certain of the lowest price it is willing to offer.
225 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q38. “Having a proven track record in best-practice debt
    collection is a key criteria for us.”
226 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q60.
227 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q39.1 “It definitely favours a simple approach to sales as
    KYI [know your investor] checks have already been performed, compliance requirements are already
    met.” “Our experience is that [selling to the] current debt collection agency ensures a smoother
    transition of ownership, compared to our experience when transferring portfolios from one agency to
    another.”
228 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q12.1. “[…] has on occasion held back information, in order
    to prevent us from getting a good price for the portfolio from other purchasers, and thus to allow them
    to make the highest bid on the portfolio instead.”
229 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q39.1. “Despite these facts a tender process would always be
    launched in order to ensure the best possible transaction both in terms of pricing, compliance and
    ethical considerations.”
230 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q39 “You are more or less forced to sell to the current
    collection agency (because it's too costly and complicated to move it elsewhere). It´s only the VERY
    few times when the price is MUCH better (25% higher or more) that we even bother selling to
    anybody else.” “Our current collection agency would be preferred if the price is comparable.”
                                                        64

281. The views expressed by competitors on the link between debt collection and debt
     purchasing were largely in line with those of customers. Competitors also
     recognised that it was much more convenient for debt collection customers to sell to
     their collection provider than to any other purchaser, and that it significantly reduces
     the administrative costs associated with debt sales, especially if the seller does not
     hold a tender.231 Competitors emphasised the advantage of having systems that are
     already integrated, meaning that it is much quicker to start transferring data and to
     implement the sale agreement. Based on the market investigation results it is not
     possible to conclude on the average proportion of debt purchasing business coming
     from debt collection customers; however, one competitor indicated that in their case
     the proportion amounts to 90%.232
282. More generally, competitors also confirmed the importance of skills related to debt
     collection in order to compete successfully in debt purchasing (i.e. even if bidding
     for a portfolio that they have not collected on). The majority of competitors
     regarded the ability to analyse and value portfolios as a necessary skill, 233 and many
     also mentioned the importance of having collection capacity.234 The way in which
     the purchaser will collect on the debt is also a main consideration for customers
     when choosing a debt purchaser. A significant proportion rated the ability to
     perform debt collection in-house as an important criterion, as it allows them to have
     greater confidence that debtors will not be treated inappropriately. Customers are
     very conscious of the risk to their own reputation that could be created by
     malpractice on the part of the new owner of the debt portfolios, and the reputation of
     the purchaser is therefore also very influential in their choice.235
283. The results of the market investigation demonstrated that Lindorff and Intrum
     Justitia are generally regarded as very strong players in debt purchasing. Customers
     almost unanimously name them as the top two in the market, with other competitors
     only getting occasional mentions among the top five.236 Customers have a very high
     opinion of Lindorff as a debt purchaser, and emphasised in particular its high ethical
     standards, reputation and expertise. It is seen as a top competitor with good insight
     into the market, which allows it to offer competitive prices. Its financial capacity to
     bid for larger portfolios and international presence were also seen as strengths.237
284. Intrum Justitia was also generally well regarded by customers, although some
     customers were less familiar with Intrum Justitia than with Lindorff, and it does not
     inspire quite the same confidence. Its experience, competitive pricing and financial
     capacity were mentioned as being amongst its main strengths, and one customer
     also considered it to have particular expertise in handling claims from the financial
     sector.
285. Competitors also regarded Lindorff as a clear number one on the market, all ranking
     it as the strongest player in debt purchasing. Intrum Justitia is, however, slightly less
231 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q49-50.
232 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q49.
233 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q41.
234 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q48.
235 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q36. “To avoid bad collection practice potentially distorting
    the reputation of us as the selling institution. We need to know that clients are treated according to
    good practice.”
236 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q37.
237 Customers, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q43.
                                                        65

     highly rated by competitors. PRA is generally seen as the number two in Norway,
     followed by a small group of other competitors including Intrum Justitia.238
     Similarly to customers, competitors describe Lindorff as a competent, professional
     purchaser, with a good reputation and good knowledge of the market. Competitors
     also commented on the size of its existing portfolio, its funding and its experience in
     debt collection as particular strengths.239 Moreover, relative to other competitors,
     Lindorff is seen as having a particular advantage in terms of the size of its
     databases, which it has built up thanks to the financial backing which has allowed it
     to acquire a large volume of portfolios.
286. As mentioned above, competitors generally rated Intrum Justitia less highly than
     Lindorff, but it is nonetheless seen as a strong player. One competitor mentioned its
     international presence, its in-depth insight into markets and its local operational
     units as particular strengths.240 Intrum Justitia was one of the two providers (the
     other being PRA Group) most often named by competitors as the closest competitor
     to Lindorff.241 Competitors consistently rated Lindorff as Intrum Justitia’s closest
     competitor, followed by PRA Group.242
287. Customers’ views on the closeness of competition between Lindorff and Intrum
     Justitia were largely consistent with their perception of the Parties as the top two in
     the market. Intrum Justitia was the purchaser most often named as Lindorff’s closest
     competitor, followed by Conecto (SpareBank 1) and Kredinor. A small number of
     other competitors were mentioned very occasionally (e.g. Axactor, Svea and PRA).
     Lindorff was also consistently named by customers as Intrum Justitia’s closest
     competitor, with other debt purchasers barely mentioned. Customers regard the two
     companies as being interested in similar portfolios, and as being similarly
     financially strong, thus able to bid for larger portfolios.
288. The majority of customers were of the opinion that the Transaction would have an
     impact on the Norwegian debt purchasing market. They are concerned about the
     possible effect of the loss of one of the major players, and expect to see the choice
     of potential debt purchasers reduced, leading potentially to lower prices being
     offered for portfolios.243 Some customers think that the merged entity will have a
     dominant position on the debt purchasing market.244
289. Competitors had mixed views on the impact of the Transaction on the market for
     debt purchasing. Some were less certain as to whether there would be significant
     consequences for competition but others were very concerned by the prospect of the
     merged entity becoming a dominant player with the power to control at least certain
     parts of the market. One competitor stated that some customers will be left with
238 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q52.
239 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q56. “Having strong financial backing from shareholders,
    Lindorff was able to invest significantly in portfolios, which allowed it to subsidise its debt collection
    business and provided the scale for further growth. As a result, Lindorff has obtained valuable data,
    which most other players do not have.”
240 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q56.
241 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q54.
242 Competitors, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q55.
243 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q52. “The merger will have a negative impact for us as a
    client, because we will have far fewer alternatives (none if we want to work with any of the really big
    players on the market).
244 Customer, Norway – Questionnaire 12, Q51 “They will totally dominate the debt purchase industry.”
                                                         66

     only one suitable provider, and expects the merged entity to gradually extend its
     influence to cover the whole debt purchasing (and debt collection) market, starting
     from the financial sector where it will be strongest.245
290. In conclusion, the market investigation confirmed that Lindorff is a very clear
     market leader in debt purchasing in Norway, its home country. It enjoys an excellent
     reputation amongst customers and has the financial capacity to bid for portfolios
     which are out of the reach of other debt collection providers. Views on Intrum
     Justitia’s position on the market are more mixed, but it is at least one of a small
     group of followers, and potentially (at least in customers’ minds) number two
     behind Lindorff. Although there are also a number of larger financial investors
     present on the market, customers expressed a definite reluctance to sell to
     purchasers that are not active in debt collection in Norway. This makes it much
     more difficult for competitors of this type, such as B2B Holding and PRA Group, to
     compete on the Norwegian market. Of the other debt collectors active in debt
     purchasing, none has the international scale of the Parties and may not thus be able
     to bid competitively for larger portfolios, especially in the financial sector where the
     Parties also have particularly extensive expertise and experience from their debt
     collection business.
 291. In view of the above the Commission considers that the Transaction gives rise to
     serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in relation to the
     market for debt purchasing in Norway.
               IV.2.B.3 Sweden
IV.2.B.3.1        Sweden – Debt collection
 292. The table below shows the market share of the Parties and their competitors in debt
     collection in 2015. The merged entity would be the clear market leader with a
     market share of close to [30-40]%, while the closest competitor, Svea Inkasso,
     would hold around [10-20]%. No other competitors would have a market share of
     above [5-10]%, meaning that the merged entity and Svea Inkasso would form a
     clear top tier of two major providers.
245 Competitor, Norway – Questionnaire 4, Q73.1.2. “…the combined entity will establish a new league
    of provider which will reduce mobility in the market as some segments will only have one provider.”
    “The combined entity will be able to establish itself as the only provider in certain areas of the market
    (beginning with financial institutes and then diversifying into other segments) due to its size and
    capabilities. The larger customers therefore may only have one buyer to sell to.”
                                                        67


     on the market, in particular Svea, Alektum, Sergel, Arvato, Visma, OpusCapita and
     PayEx, which will continue to exert competitive pressure on the combined entity
     following the Transaction. The Notifying Party also points out that a number of
     these competitors are also active in the provision of debt collection to customers in
     the financial sector, the area where the Parties are strongest.
296. Furthermore, the Notifying Party argues that there are no significant barriers to
     entry on the debt collection market in Sweden. It is relatively easy to obtain a debt
     collection licence, and applications are usually processed within 2-3 months. The
     Notifying Party also submits that entry can take place in a number of different ways.
     The Notifying Party further explains that there are no capital requirements for
     entering the Swedish debt collection market, and that the necessary staff and
     resources can be acquired easily. In particular, IT systems can be purchased from
     third party providers and a large amount of information on debtors is publicly
     available. The Notifying Party also maintains that new entrants can quickly develop
     a good reputation on the Swedish market, either as a result of their reputation in
     other CMS, or by building up a record of good performance.
297. The Notifying Party explains that the fees that can be charged to debtors for
     collection services are regulated by law, and are independent of the level of the debt.
     Overall, the level of the fees is slightly lower than in the other Nordic markets.
298. The Notifying Party submits that debt collection contracts, at least for larger
     customers, are mainly non-exclusive in Sweden, and customers can therefore
     conclude contracts with additional providers without incurring any penalties or other
     fees. The Notifying Party does, however, acknowledge that smaller customers are
     very likely to have exclusive contracts, meaning that they cannot use other
     providers. The Notifying Party emphasises that even exclusive contracts do not
     usually specify minimum volumes, and the customer is not therefore obliged to
     transfer any cases. Debt collection contracts are typically of relatively short duration
     (around 1-2 years) in Sweden, and usually include a termination period of 1-3
     months.
299. In addition, the Notifying Party also acknowledges that contracts with ‘lock-in’
     clauses are sometimes used in Sweden, although it claims that these have become
     less common in recent years. The effect of such contracts is that the customer would
     have to pay a penalty fee in order to change provider for the debt surveillance phase.
     The Notifying Party argues that customer’s bargaining power has often led to such
     clauses being waived.
300. The Notifying Party submits that customers can switch provider easily in Sweden,
     and that a new provider is usually chosen via a tender procedure. In addition, the
     Notifying Party observes that downward pressure on prices has increased in recent
     years in the Swedish market, and that margins are under pressure. The Notifying
     Party expects this trend to continue after the Transaction, as a result of the strong
     competition already present on the market, and the credible threat of new entry.
301. The Notifying Party claims that benchmarking has become a relatively common
     practice among larger customers in Sweden, and that more and more customers are
     now taking up this practice. The first were in the banking sector, but benchmarking
     is now also becoming increasingly widely used in the telecoms and utilities sectors.
     The Notifying Party argues that benchmarking allows the customer to generate
     competition between debt collection providers, and to incentivise improved
     collection rates. It also provides an opportunity for smaller providers to start
                                                  69

     working with major customers, as customers often prefer to try out a new provider
     by allocating a small part of their portfolio to it, whilst still keeping on a known,
     larger provider.
302. As noted above, in Sweden the Parties have a combined market share of [20-30]%
     on the overall market for debt collection, and over [50-60]% in the markets for debt
     collection for the financial sector and for utilities respectively. The Transaction will
     lead to the combination of the number one and number four players on the market.
     These market shares do not, however, give a true reflection of the competitive
     strength of the Parties, which are viewed by market participants as the two strongest
     competitors on the Swedish debt collection market. Although the market shares
     suggest that Lindorff is only the number four on the market, both customers and
     competitors generally regarded it as the second strongest provider, after Intrum
     Justitia.
303. All competitors identified Intrum Justitia and Lindorff as the number one and two
     debt collection providers in Sweden. This very strongly suggests that Lindorff’s
     position on the market is much stronger than indicated by the market shares.
     Likewise, all competitors identified the Parties as each other’s closest
     competitors.246 The market investigation also showed that in the majority of cases in
     which a tender for debt collection services was organised, both Intrum Justitia and
     Lindorff were competing in the tender. In some cases, the Parties were the only
     companies that submitted bids.247
304. Whilst competitors recognise the presence of a relatively large pool of providers,
     they are generally of the opinion that smaller providers would struggle to serve large
     customers. Large customers are seen as having different requirements compared to
     smaller or medium-sized companies, the latter being more often willing to accept
     standardised services and reporting.
305. A large majority of customers also identified the Parties as being among the top five
     collection providers able to serve the needs of their company.248 The Parties are
     considered to be professional companies with good reputations, large scale and good
     relationships with customers.249 One customer states, for example, “Lindorff is one
     of two major providers in Sweden (Intrum Justitia the other one). They have
     experience in debt collection of financial claims, a good reputation, competitive
     pricing and also located in all our markets.” A significant number of customers also
     see the Parties as the only debt collection providers able to meet their needs. The
     main reasons for this are their capacity to handle large volumes of cases and their
     specialist knowledge of the banking sector.250 The vast majority of customers
     identified the Parties as each other’s closest competitors in the Swedish market.251
306. Moreover, the market investigation showed that in the large majority of cases in
     which a tender for debt collection services was organised, both Lindorff and Intrum
246 Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q12, Q14, Q15.
247 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q9.
248 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q21.2.
249 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q15.
250 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q10 and Q21. “They are the two big players in the market.”
    “They were considered the only suppliers large enough to handle our volumes and with sufficient
    banking knowledge.”
251 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q17, Q20.
                                                    70

     Justitia competed in the tender. In some cases, the Parties were the only companies
     to submit bids.252 Customers explained that they were very selective in choosing the
     debt collection providers they invite to bid for their contracts. Factors such as size,
     experience in the market, reputation and public perception, previous contacts and
     market research were all taken into account. This demonstrates that customers often
     assess possible debt collectors based on the information they have already, before
     even considering the price or other aspects of the package that a provider may offer.
     Size and reputation were also named amongst the main criteria for choosing from
     amongst the competitors that submitted bids.253 Although price is also an important
     factor for customers, many have a clear preference for choosing market leaders, due
     to the trust they have in their abilities, such that other providers will struggle, even if
     they can compete on price and performance. This strongly contradicts the Notifying
     Party’s arguments that competition is mainly focused on price and that smaller
     providers can easily develop a reputation in the market.
307. The results of the market investigation also show that switching provider may not be
     easy as claimed by the Notifying Party. Competitors had varying views on the time
     it would take to put in place all the necessary systems to start serving a new
     customer, but some stated that it could be as long as 12 months. In general,
     competitors confirmed that the need for integration of systems and transfer of data
     in particular mean that there is considerable time and cost associated with changing
     provider.
308. Responses to the market investigation confirmed that multi-sourcing is fairly widely
     used in Sweden. Many larger customers use two or more debt collection providers
     simultaneously, and a large proportion of these also have benchmarking exercises
     set up. Where customers multi-source, Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are very often
     both among the providers used, and are in some instances the only two providers.
309. Contrary to the claims made by the Notifying Party, the market investigation also
     revealed that the majority of customers consider there to be significant obstacles
     related to switching debt collection providers. The integration of their systems with
     those of a new provider was generally viewed as the main barrier. Most customers
     did not consider the cost of switching to be prohibitive but views on this were
     mixed, with some also considering the cost a main reason for not moving to a new
     provider.254 The cost and time associated with the practical aspects of changing
     provider were also not the only factors that deter customers from switching.
     Customers’ actual switching habits also confirm that there is a strong tendency to
     stay with the same provider. The vast majority of customers have either not changed
     their debt collection provider in the last five years, or have changed only once.255
     The majority of customers also state that when they next choose a debt collection
     provider, the incumbent will have a significant advantage relative to other providers.
     The main reasons for this were that the current provider already knows the
     customer’s processes and requirements and already has a relationship with the
252 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q9.
253 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q7 and Q10. “We decided to use the three largest debt
    collection companies in Sweden.”
254 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q12. “The switching costs (…) In relation to our overall
    general costs that is a small amount but as a proportion of collection cost it is significant.”
255 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q13.
                                                        71

      debtors, and that choosing the current provider would avoid going through the
      process of integrating systems again.256
310. In addition, competitors also confirmed that it would usually be difficult for a
     customer to change provider before the end of their contract. This is only possible if
     specifically provided for in the contract, and it is very likely that there will be
     penalty fees to pay. One competitor also suggested that certain additional fees may
     apply even if the customer is switching at the end of the contract.257
311. Contrary to the claim made by the Notifying Party, the majority of competitors do
     not expect any new providers to enter the Swedish market in the coming years.
     Barriers to entry are deemed to be considerable, and even where some of these
     barriers could be overcome, the cost would be too great for there to be an incentive
     to enter the market. One competitor stated, for example that “in the past 10 years the
     industry has hardly seen any top-tier provider enter a new market by building up a
     new organisation”.258 Furthermore, competitors explain that entering new segments
     of the debt collection market may also not be easy. One competitor stated that
     significant investment is needed in order to be able to serve customers in all sectors.
     The main areas where a provider would have to make changes are IT systems, data
     and analytics, and staff with expertise in the sector.259
312. A large majority of customers believe that the Transaction will have a negative effect
     on the Swedish debt collection market. Customers are mainly concerned about the
     consequences of the transaction for their choice of providers, prices and levels of
     service. In particular, some larger customers fear that they would be left with almost
     no choice of provider, as there are already so few providers that can meet their
     needs. Others are concerned that there could be significant price increases, due to the
     dominant position that the merged entity would have on the Swedish market. One
     customer explained, for example, that “for a major bank with large volumes, a broad
     product/service portfolio and specific demands on handling, knowledge and ethical
     standards etc. there are in our view only two primary suppliers in Sweden: Lindorff
     and Intrum Justitia”. 260
313. The vast majority of competitors are also of the opinion that the Transaction will
     have a negative impact on the Swedish debt collection market. A number of
     competitors believe that the Transaction will create a monopoly and reduce
     competition. Competitors also expect the merged entity to be particularly strong in
     certain sectors, in particular the financial sector, and for customers with large
     volumes of cases. Their reasons were very similar to those mentioned by customers,
     namely that the number of providers that can meet the needs of large customers is
     already very limited. In addition, one competitor explained that the volume of data
 256 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q14.
 257 Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q33. “Some sort of “poison pill” i.e. a cost to transfer the
     debts (often connected to costs for legal actions) often apply if a customer want to change DC also
     after the contract has ended.”
 258 Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q10.
 259 Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q5.
 260 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q28. “There are only two major providers in the Swedish
     market today. This means that competition will be reduced, and possible impact on pricing, services
     etc. It will probably increase 'provider power' from a customer/provider perspective.” “I think the
     merger between two dominant players on the market [will] have a big impact on [the] level of prices.”
                                                        72


     bilateral negotiations, and sellers would typically only consider inviting purchasers
     that have been pre-approved.
319. There is a strong link between debt collection and debt purchasing, which would
     appear to be even more pronounced in Sweden than in some of the other markets.
     The majority of customers have sold their debt portfolios to their current or then
     debt collector at some point in the past, and almost all customers are firmly
     convinced of the advantages of selling to their debt collection provider. The reasons
     they gave are very similar to those already discussed in the overall section on the
     link between debt collection and debt purchasing (e.g. lower costs, less
     inconvenience and administrative work associated with the transfer, no need for
     further integration of IT systems, the debt collector’s knowledge of the portfolio,
     and certainty about how debtors will be treated), and therefore will not be discussed
     again here. For some respondents, selling to another purchaser was not even
     considered a feasible option, as the additional costs involved would make it
     unprofitable.263
320. In addition, competitors also confirmed that the data provided by the debt seller
     during a tender for a debt sale is insufficient to allow a debt purchaser to accurately
     value a portfolio. Debt purchasers that are also active in debt collection are therefore
     at a clear advantage in terms of their ability to value the portfolio accurately, as they
     will have extensive in-house databases that can be used to construct benchmark
     portfolios. Whilst the Notifying Party claims that a particularly large amount of data
     is publicly available in Sweden, a significant proportion of competitors believed that
     the information provided by the seller is not sufficient to value a portfolio, and that
     further data comes from debt collection. Whilst specific pieces of information, such
     as bailiff information, may be publicly available, data from collection is nonetheless
     invaluable to performing an accurate valuation.264
321. Respondents’ perception of Lindorff and Intrum Justitia as debt purchasers were
     largely consistent with their views on the Parties as debt collectors, reflecting the
     strong link between the two areas. All competitors considered the Parties to be the
     top one and two purchasers of debt in Sweden, and as each other’s closest
     competitors.265 Customers also see the Parties as the market leaders in debt
     purchasing by some distance. The vast majority names the Parties as their preferred
     potential buyers, whilst other competitors (e.g. PRA Group, Svea, B2Holding,
     Sergel, Sileo, Alektum) were all only named by a minority of customers.266
     Furthermore, a large majority of customers that had sold debt portfolios in the last
     three years had sold to one of the Parties.267
322. Customers see Lindorff as a professional company with a good analytical team,
     considerable experience and a good reputation. Its large internal database (which it
     has developed over the years from the portfolios it has worked on) is also seen as a
     major strength. Both customers and competitors consider Lindorff to be particularly
     strong in the banking sector. They also mention its financial capacity as a factor that
263 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q30 and Q39. “The cost of selling to anyone other than the
    debt collection agency has proven high, i.e. not a profitable solution.”
264 Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q69.
265 Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q52, Q54, Q55.
266 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q37, Q45, Q46.
267 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q33.
                                                        74

     distinguishes it from many competitors. One competitor explained that its financial
     backing from shareholders has allowed it to grow through acquisitions of portfolios,
     which have in turn helped it to build up very comprehensive internal databases. 268
323. Intrum Justitia is also regarded as a strong competitor on the Swedish market. The
     characteristics that customers associate with Intrum Justitia are largely the same as
     for Lindorff. It is considered to be a professional, reliable company, with
     considerable experience in debt purchasing, a strong valuation team and a good
     reputation. In addition, customers value its size and financial capacity, seeing it as
     one of the most active players in debt purchasing. Similarly to Lindorff, Intrum
     Justitia is known by both customers and competitors to be particularly focused on
     the banking sector, although competitors also consider it a strong player in other
     sectors. One competitor specifically mentioned Intrum Justitia’s position as market
     leader in debt collection as one of its main advantages in debt purchasing. It is
     thought to hold data on most debtors’ in the Swedish market, and can therefore
     always perform accurate valuations of portfolios.269
324. In stark contrast to the picture of the debt purchasing market provided by the
     Notifying Party, the debt purchasing market in Sweden is very much dominated by
     large debt collectors, with financial investors only playing a minor role. The
     majority of customers do not consider financial investors as suitable buyers for their
     debt.270 The small minority of customers that would be willing to sell debt to an
     international private equity firm would only do so if it were to cooperate with a
     local, reputable debt collection company, and offered a good price. None of the
     competitors that responded to the market investigation had, however, been involved
     in such co-investment agreements in the past three years.271
325. Customers’ reluctance to sell to private equity firms is consistent with the
     characteristics they generally value in debt purchasers. A large majority mentioned
     reputation, price and size/capacity as the three most important criteria when
     evaluating the suitability of a potential debt purchaser.272 The importance of
     reputation is mainly due to sellers’ fear that their own image could be tarnished if
     debtors of their company are badly treated by the party they sell the debts on to.
     Contrary to the Notifying Party’s statement that customers will choose primarily on
     price, as the collection on the portfolio no longer has consequences for them, the
     responses from customers in Sweden show that reputation and standing in the
     market are at least as important. Furthermore, the importance of both reputation and
     size in customers’ minds makes it particularly difficult for new or smaller
     purchasers to enter the Swedish debt purchasing market or to increase their market
     share.
326. Competitors also emphasised the importance of reputation on the debt purchasing
     market, with the majority considering it to be essential or very important for
     competing successfully. The other characteristics seen as most important by
268 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q43, Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q52.
269 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q46, Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q53.
270 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q39.
271 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q41.
272 Customers, Sweden – Questionnaire 11, Q36.
                                                  75

     competitors were IT systems, databases, the ability to analyse portfolios and
     industry knowledge.273
327. The importance of the above criteria for competing successfully in debt purchasing
     also illustrate why barriers to entry are in fact very high on the Swedish debt
     purchasing market, contrary to the claims made by the Notifying Party. Reputation
     and scale cannot be achieved quickly, and the importance of trust and existing
     relationships mean that ewer players are unlikely to be invited to compete in
     tenders. In addition, the particularly strong tendency to sell to the debt collector
     means than a large part of the Swedish debt purchasing market is effectively closed
     to competition.
328. Competitors generally considered that regulatory requirements, access to historic
     data, and the need for debt collection services all constitute major barriers to entry.
     One competitor explained, “It is demanding as you either will have to start a
     greenfield operation or have to acquire a debt collector. . . It is also necessary to
     have local competence and reference portfolios in order to value and price
     portfolios”.274
329. A significant proportion of customers in Sweden expressed concern about the
     possible consequences of the Transaction on the debt purchasing market. Many felt
     that they would now have a limited choice of purchasers, and in some cases no
     choice at all, as in the past the Parties have been by far the strongest bidders for
     larger portfolios. Customers with large volumes of debt cases and those in the
     banking and telecoms sectors were therefore particular concerned by the possible
     impact of the Transaction in terms of prices. One customer stated, for example, “for
     the larger portfolios, especially in banking, Intrum Justitia and Lindorff have most
     often been two of the last or even the two last bidders remaining in an auction”.
     Another customer stated that “the impact of this merger is likely to be worst in
     Sweden and for companies with large volumes of invoices, like us”.275
330. The majority of competitors consider that the Transaction will have an impact on
     the market. Similarly to customers, competitors were particularly concerned about
     the effects of the merger for larger customers, for whom they envisage the merged
     entity becoming the only viable purchaser. The merged entity’s scale was seen as a
     major factor in the dominant position it will occupy on the market. According to
     some competitors, it will be able to value the portfolios more accurately and thus
     push other providers, which will not be able compete with it on price, out of the
     market. A competitor stated that the merged entity would be able to establish itself
     as the sole provider in certain areas of the market, starting with the banking sector,
     and to subsequently extend its influence in other sectors.276
331. In conclusion, the Parties are seen as the strongest players on the debt purchasing
     market in Sweden, in particular in view of their expertise in analysis and their
     financial capacity. They are widely considered to be each other’s closest
     competitors and have very similar profiles on the Swedish market. Furthermore, the
     majority of customers who have sold debt in the past three years have sold to one of
273 Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q48.
274 Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q44.
275 Customers, Sweden, - Questionnaire 11, Q51-52.
276 Competitors, Sweden – Questionnaire 3, Q72-73.
                                                   76


    Table 13: Debt collection market shares, by client segments, Estonia (2015)
                Client            Company                  Revenue                Share
              segments                                     (MEUR)
            Financial         Lindorff                     [amount]             [10-20]%
            sector            Intrum Justitia              [amount]             [30-40]%
                              Combined                     [amount]             [50-60]%
            Utilities         Lindorff                     [amount]             [10-20]%
                              Intrum Justitia              [amount]                  -
                              Combined                     [amount]             [10-20]%
            Telecoms          Lindorff                     [amount]             [40-50] %
                              Intrum Justitia              [amount]                  -
                              Combined                     [amount]             [40-50]%
            Public sector Lindorff                         [amount]                  -
                              Intrum Justitia              [amount]                  -
                              Combined                     [amount]                  -
            Trade, SME, Lindorff                           [amount]              [5-10]%
            eCommerce, Intrum Justitia                     [amount]              [10-20]%
            Other             Combined                     [amount]              [20-30]%
335. The Notifying Party acknowledges that the Transaction will combine the top two
     and three debt collection players in Estonia. However, it believes the Transaction
     will not significantly impede effective competition in the Estonian market. The
     Notifying Party argues that Julianus Inkasso, the current market leader, will remain
     a competitor of similar size of the merged entity with a market share of [20-30]%. In
     addition, several other competitors with market shares between [0-5] and [10-20]%
     will remain on the market.
336. The Notifying Party also explains that the Estonian debt collection market is young,
     very small and underdeveloped. Notwithstanding this fact, it is characterised by a
     large number of competitors, which do not need a license in order to supply debt
     collection services in Estonia.
337. According to the Notifying Party, clients have strong buyer power based on the ease
     of switching provider and the predominance of in-house debt collection which
     remains the overwhelmingly used method for collection in Estonia. Customers’
     threat to move or return to in-house collection in such market constitutes a
     significant competitive constraint to the Parties’ activities.
338. The Notifying Party explains that debt collection contracts in Estonia are generally
     very simple, of no fix duration and not exclusive. Clients can use several collectors
     in parallel, and switch between these at will. It also indicates that smaller clients in
     Estonia switch debt collectors very regularly. The Notifying Party concedes that a
     few debt collection contracts with large clients may have a period of exclusivity
     included, with however modest penalties for breach of such clause.
339. Furthermore, the Notifying Party argues there are no significant barriers to entry
     into the Estonian debt collection market since no regulatory requirements apply and
    of less than [0-5]% in both 2014 and 2013. Conversely, Lindorff has lost shares over time in both the
    telecoms and the public sector. In telecoms it had a share of [80-90]% in 2014 and of [90-100]% in
    2013, while in the public sector it had a share of [0-5]% in both years.
                                                            78

     there are no significant technical barriers or capital needs. New entrants are free to
     compete on price and clients have every ability and incentive to test new players.
340. The Commission notes that pots-Transaction the merged entity would have a
     combined market share of [30-40]%, becoming the largest player on the Estonian
     debt collection market. The next largest competitor will be Julianus Inkasso with a
     market share of [20-30]%. Beyond these two players there will be a number of
     competitors, none of the reaching the market share of [10-20]%. Should the market
     be further segmented according to the customers’ sector of activity, the combined
     market shares of the Parties would exceed [50-60]% in the financial sector, with a
     relevant increment brought by the Transaction ([10-20]% by Lindorff).
341. The results of the market investigation confirmed the strong position of the Parties
     on the Estonian market. The vast majority of customers responding to the market
     investigation submit that the Parties are among the top three debt collection
     providers, together with Julianus Inkasso. Only a fourth player in the market
     (Creditreform) is mentioned as a suitable provider by a relevant number of
     respondents.281 In particular, some international customers underlined the limited
     choice of providers able to collect debts from both domestic and international
     debtors and able to meet their servicing requirements. One international customer
     explained that “[In] the last tender to select a debt collection provider […] Intrum
     Justitia and Lindorff were the only bidders, as they were the only companies
     meeting the tender requirements at the time.”282 Competitors have also identified
     Lindorff and Intrum Justitia among the top five players in Estonia and explained
     that not all players active in the market are able to serve all types of customers,
     especially in relation to larger and international customers.283
342. The market investigation partly confirmed the view of the Notifying Parties that the
     Estonian debt collection market is rather small and underdeveloped. Performing
     large portions of debt collection in-house is not uncommon and is mainly justified
     by the need to keep a direct relationship with the customers.284 However, a majority
     of customers also explained that they would still prefer to acquire certain collection
     services from external providers rather than performing them in-house, in case of a
     small but permanent increase in prices.285 That is because professional debt
     collectors are considered to be more efficient in dealing with debt cases, especially
     the most complex ones that cannot be solved in-house since they require specific
     expertise.286 Additional resources and relevant training would be needed to insource
     those cases, with adjustments that can take up to one year to be implemented.287
     This means that moving or returning to in-house collection is not considered a
     feasible option for collection services that have been outsourced.
343. Contrary to what the Notifying Party submitted, the market investigation revealed
     that switching does not happen often. The vast majority of customers responding to
     the market investigation have never changed their debt collection provider in the
281 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q21.
282 Minutes of a pre-notification call with a customer in Estonia on 8 March 2017.
283 Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q12 and Q5
284 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q4.
285 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q27.
286 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q4 and Q27.
287 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q27.
                                                        79

     past five years.288 For many customers switching would not generate significant
     costs, but some do explain that data transferring and system integration may
     constitute relevant barriers. For example, one customer explains that there are
     “Mainly information flow related obstacles - developing new system and
     integration, handling the debts in transition period.”289
344. In addition, the vast majority of customers confirmed that next time switching will
     occur, i.e. they will be selecting a new debt collection provider, the incumbent will
     have an advantage versus other providers; in particular, it will have better
     knowledge of the company and its clients, and integrated systems already in
     place.290 Customers explained that it would be difficult to transfer old cases to a new
     provider and that having more than one collector at a time is not convenient,
     especially for smaller customers that typically have a smaller number of claims to
     handle.291 These elements constitute a further incentive to keep the incumbent
     provider at the time of contract renewal and thus not to switch.
345. The majority of customers responding to the investigation do not multi-source, i.e.
     use multiple debt collectors in parallel.292 Competitors also confirmed that multi-
     sourcing is not common, although some mention that it is relatively more common
     for large customers.293
346. The majority of customers have identified Lindorff and Intrum Justitia as close
     competitors, together with Julianus Inkasso. Customers generally perceive Lindorff
     and Intrum Justitia as professional partners with good reputation, good customer-
     orientation, and high quality services.294 While Jiulianus Inkasso is also identified as
     a strong player on the Estonian market, it does not have the scale and the
     international footprint of Lindorff and Intrum Justitia, which benefit from their
     broad geographic presence, especially in view of serving large international
     customers.
347. The market investigation did not reveal that new entries in the Estonian debt
     collection market are expected to materialise in the near future. One competitor also
     explains that absence of local knowledge constitutes a relevant barrier to enter the
     market from other countries.295 Moreover, some competitors explain that entering
     new segments of the debt collection market can also take a number of months,
     depending on the complexity of the cases (especially in the financial and the public
     sectors).296
348. In relation to the possible impact of the Transaction, some customers express
     concerns in relation to a reduced choice of providers, possible increase of prices and
288 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q13.
289 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q12.
290 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q14.
291 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q6 and Q12.
292 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q6.
293 Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q29.
294 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q15-20. Minutes of a pre-notification call with a customer in
    Estonia on 8 March 2017. “The price and the services offered by Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are very
    much comparable.”
295 Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q10.
296 Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q32.
                                                     80


     The Notifying Party also has not commented on the above market shares, even
     though they indicate that the Transaction could lead to significant impediment of
     effective competition on the Estonian debt purchasing market..
352. The table above shows that the Parties have a combined market share of [40-50]%
     (by value) in debt purchasing tenders over the period 2013-2015. Although the
     increment brought by Intrum Justitia is modest, the market investigation revealed
     that Intrum Justitia is a stronger player than suggested by the market shares
     submitted by the Notifying Party.
353. First, many respondents to the market investigation identified Lindorff and Intrum
     Justitia as close competitors. In particular, customers consider both companies to
     have good knowledge of the market and the financial sector, reputation, data, and
     financial capability.302 Also competitors underlined that Parties’ have very much
     common strengths such as scale, knowledge and access to funds, which give both of
     them significant advantages in purchasing debt portfolios, especially from larger
     sellers, typically active in the financial sector.303
354. Second, the majority of respondents confirmed the existence of a strong link
     between debt collection and debt purchasing. Therefore, given Lindorff’s and
     Intrum Justitia’s individual market shares in the debt collection market, they are
     both well placed to strongly compete in debt purchasing; and particularly in the
     financial sector in which both of them hold strong positions in collection and where
     the largest clients for debt purchasing are typically found.
355. On the one hand, the ability to perform debt collection is considered one of the most
     relevant criteria by customers when assessing the suitability of debt purchasers.304
     Customers also recognise that selling debt portfolios to the incumbent debt collector
     is more convenient in terms of data transferring and in view of preserving a
     continued relationship with debtors.305
356. On the other hand, competitors confirmed that incumbent debt collectors have a fair
     advantage over other players when purchasing debt portfolios from their clients in
     collection, especially due the availability of valuable information gathered in
     collection and necessary to place better offers.306 In fact, while the data provided by
     sellers in the context of a debt sale is sufficient to allow participants to make their
     offers, debt collectors can make “large” use of data gathered in debt collection, a
     relevant resource in the context of valuing portfolio.307
357. The market investigation showed that debt purchasing is a fairly concentrated
     market. Customers and competitors named a relatively small group of potential debt
302 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q37.
303 Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q56.
304 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q36 and Q38. For example, one customer explains that “We
    need to know how the portfolio will be handled after we have sold it. We want to be sure that
    portfolio is handled by an experienced debt collection company with a good reputation.”
305 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q39. For example, one customer explains that “It's important
    that the customers or debtors are treated well. Customers are already in contact with the current debt
    collector which is an advantage for both parts. They have good relationship with debtors and if the
    price is reasonable, the first choice for us is the current debt collector.”
306 Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q51.
307 Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q69 and Q70.
                                                           82

     purchasers, which are also active in debt collection.308 Moreover, the market is
     small in size and driven by existing relationships. Reputation is of paramount
     important; thus sellers typically invite companies that are known to them or with
     which they had some form of cooperation to submit bids for their portfolios.309 This
     requirement further limits the choice of purchasers that are actually invited to place
     offers and actively participate in debt sales.
358. Moreover, many customers do not believe that international private equity firms or
     asset management companies are suitable buyers for their debt portfolios.310 For
     example, one customer explains that only “Companies located in Estonia knowing
     the local market and customers [are suitable].”311 Competitors also confirmed that
     such buyers are typically not active on the Estonian market.312
359. When assessing the impact of the Transaction respondents were less certain as to
     whether there would be significant consequences for competition. This can be partly
     explain by the fact the debt purchasing market is still not very much developed and
     thus does not constitute a primary business for market participants. However some
     respondents did mention that in their view competition would decrease and the
     merged entity would gain a very strong position in the market.313
360. In conclusion, the strong link with debt collection would already give sufficient
     grounds to raise concerns on the debt purchasing market. In addition, the market
     investigation revealed that choice of debt purchasers is already limited, especially
     for larger customers that require purchasers to be large well-known operators in the
     market.
361. In view of the above the Commission considers that the Transaction gives rise to
     serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in relation to the
     market for debt purchasing in Estonia.
               IV.2.B.5 Denmark
IV.2.B.5.1      Denmark – Debt collection
362. In Denmark, the Transaction would lead to a combination of the number one
     (Intrum Justitia, [10-20]%) and number three players (Lindorff, [5-10]%) on the
     debt collection market. The strongest of the remaining competitors would be
     Collectia with a market share of only [5-10]%, followed by a number of other
     smaller players. Following the Transaction the leading position of Intrum Justitia,
     which already pre-merger is significantly bigger than its competitors, would be
     additionally strengthened leading to a significant gap between the new market
308 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q37; Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q52.
309 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q30. For example, one customer explains that “The Estonian
    market is small and the companies that are interested in and capable of debt purchasing are known to
    us.” Another explains that “We choose from the partners who have previously made us offers or we
    have had cooperation with.”
310 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q38.
311 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q38
312 Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q60 and Q61.
313 Customers, Estonia – Questionnaire 13, Q51; Competitors, Estonia – Questionnaire 5, Q72.
                                                       83


     Table 16: Debt collection market shares, by client segments, Denmark (2015)
                  Client            Company                  Revenue               Share
                segments                                     (MEUR)
              Financial         Lindorff                     [amount]            [20-30]%
              sector            Intrum Justitia              [amount]            [20-30]%
                                Combined                     [amount]            [40-50]%
              Utilities         Lindorff                     [amount]              [0-5]%
                                Intrum Justitia              [amount]             [5-10]%
                                Combined                     [amount]            [10-20]%
              Telecoms          Lindorff                     [amount]              [0-5]%
                                Intrum Justitia              [amount]            [50-60]%
                                Combined                     [amount]            [60-70]%
              Public sector Lindorff                              -                   -
                                Intrum Justitia                   -                   -
                                Combined                          -                   -
              Trade, SME, Lindorff                                -                   -
              eCommerce, Intrum Justitia                     [amount]            [10-20]%
              Other             Combined                     [amount]            [10-20]%
365. The Notifying Party submits that its arguments related to the general competitive
     conditions on the debt collection market, apply also to Denmark. In particular the
     Notifying Party underlines that debt collection services are homogenous and fees
     are regulated therefore the merged entity could not effectively raise prices.
     Furthermore, according to the Notifying Party the market is characterised by the
     presence of strong customers who are cost conscious and can easily switch
     suppliers, while switching is possible and easy, in particular because of the presence
     of many credible alternative suppliers, including multinational CMS providers as
     well as well-established national players. Lastly, the Notifying Party submits that
     the barriers to entry are low and thus any attempt of the merged entity to raise prices
     or reduce quality would be constrained by likely, timely and sufficient entry.
366. As regards the debt collection market in Denmark the Notifying Party submits that
     on this market in particular there is a large number of credible debt collecting
     companies who effectively compete with the Parties. Furthermore, the Notifying
     Party notes that the increment generated by the Transaction ([5-10]% market share
     of Lindorff) is small and since there are other competitors with similar or larger
     market shares the Transaction does not eliminate a particularly strong competitive
     constraint on Intrum Justitia.
367. The Notifying Party does not submit any arguments with regard to very strong
     position of the merged entity in certain sectors, in particular financial sector and
     telecoms, other than stating that the market for debt collection should not be
     segmented according to any criteria.
368. The Notifying Party submits that the Danish market is particular in that law firms
     had a state-imposed monopoly to perform legal collection until 1 January 2008. The
     Notifying Party claims that even though the legal debt collection monopoly for law
     firms was scaled back, law firms have been able to maintain their strong position
     and specialised third party debt collectors struggled to gain market shares. The
     Notifying Party submits that the strength of the Danish law firms is one of several
     factors which will ensure that the merged entity could not exercise market power
     post-Transaction.
                                                           85

369. The Notifying Party submits that contracts in Denmark are rarely exclusive, nor do
     they guarantee volumes of business; clients can therefore use several providers.
     Furthermore, contracts are generally of short duration (1-2 years) and clients have
     complete freedom to switch providers even during the contract term if they are not
     satisfied with the performance of the given provider. The Notifying Party presents
     four examples of customers over the last three years (as from 2013) who decided to
     switch from Intrum Justitia to an alternative provider.
370. The Notifying Party further argues that the Parties are not seen as particularly close
     competitors in Denmark. First because most rival CMS providers in Denmark, like
     the Parties, provide or would be able to provide all types of debt collection services.
     Second, the Notifying Party believes that the Parties’ performance in terms of
     solution rates is similar to that of other debt collectors in the market. Third, there is
     a range of competitors who participate in the same benchmarks as one or both of the
     Parties, which according to the Notifying Party indicates that there is a range of debt
     collecting companies considered by customers to be close alternatives to the Parties,
     including the smaller players, such as Alektum and Svea. Fourth, there are at least
     five competitors active in all client categories where the Parties overlap. Finally, the
     Notifying Party submits that examples of client losses and client benchmarks show
     that competitors, including relatively recent entrants, exert competitive pressure on
     the Parties.
371. The results of the market investigation confirmed Lindorff’s status as a market
     leader, and also showed that Intrum Justitia is perceived to be a much stronger
     player than would be suggested by the market shares. The Parties are generally seen
     as two of three ‘tier 1’ suppliers on the Danish market.
372. The market investigation results revealed that, contrary to the Notifying Party’s
     claims, a significant number of customers, in particular large customers having large
     number of relatively small debt tickets, consider that law firms are not capable of
     handling their cases.316 Some customers state that law firms are considered to be
     inefficient and too expensive to process large volumes of small claims (as it is
     typical e.g. for telecoms). While there are customers that consider that law firms are
     capable of providing all kinds of debt collection to any client, they often explain that
     this is not preferable. As explained by one of customers:
     “they [the law firms] would be able to do so [provide debt collection services], but
     when having a high volume of cases, it is not preferable. This is purely from a cost
     perspective, as the legal process is both expensive and time consuming. In a perfect
     world, cases are resolved before legal action have to be taken.”317
373. More generally, customers confirmed that law firms are perceived to have attractive
     proposition for large and more complex cases, which often require legal collection.
     In cases when automated, amicable collection constitutes the major part of debt
     collection services required the majority of law firms are either not capable to
     provide the required services, or at least would not be cost efficient.318
316 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q22.
317 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q22.
318 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q22. “The law firms are to us primarily for larger and more
    complex cases, while the collection providers have a more specialized set up for handling many
                                                    86

374. Furthermore, the respondents to the market investigation recognised that law firms
     are not active in debt purchasing which is seen as a significant competitive
     disadvantage, vis-à-vis the Parties, in particular when competing for customers in
     the financial sector. Such customers, if they decide to sell debt portfolios, for
     convenience and other reasons, like to sell non-performing portfolios to the collector
     who currently collects on that portfolio. Clearly, the law firms would not be in
     position to offer such a possibility.
375. Similarly to customers, competitors submit that law firms are used for the legal part
     of the collection, but not for debt surveillance or for long lasting amicable
     collection. Competitors also note that law firms, even the largest and specialised in
     debt collection, are not active in debt purchase.319
376. In view of these arguments the Commission considers that law firms are not in
     position to constrain the Parties, in particular in competition for large customers
     such as telecoms or utilities, as well as financial institutions. This fact is best
     illustrated by the Parties’ markets shares on markets for debt collection in these
     segments. As presented above the combined position of the Parties reaches [60-
     70]% as regards collection for the telecom industry and [40-50]% in collection for
     the financial sector. It appears that with regard to those customers the law firms do
     not exert meaningful competitive pressure on the Parties.
377. The market investigation revealed that the Parties are close competitors. The vast
     majority of customers and competitors listed almost exactly the same features of the
     two Parties: professionalism, good reputation, very high recovery rates, multi-
     country presence, financial strength, high quality etc.320 Both Intrum Justitia and
     Lindorff have also the same strengths in common, namely: ability to provide
     services in other countries, financial strength and the ability to handle big portfolios
     and the ability to purchase debt portfolios; strong brand, good relationships with
     customers.321
378. A significant majority of customers consider that Lindorff is the closest competitor
     of Intrum Justitia, the market leader. The only other competitor mentioned by more
     than one customer as a close competitor to Intrum Justitia was Collectia, but
     Lindorff was named most often. All the responding competitors consider that Intrum
     Justitia is the closest competitor of Lindorff and all of them consider that Lindorff is
     the closest competitor of Intrum Justitia. This is the assessment provided by the
     respondent to the market investigation even though according to the market shares
     estimates Collectia is the second largest debt collector in Denmark, following
     Intrum Justitia and ahead of Lindorff. The submissions of the market participants
     indicate that even though Lindorff is a smaller player when measured by overall
    smaller collection amounts.”; “most law firms are too expensive when it comes to small claims”; “a
    law firm cannot big scale bad debt collection.”
319 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q16. “Many law firms are used by clients for the legal part
    of early collection. Only a few law firms handle late collection. Law firms are not well organized to
    handle long term amicable collection, but are specialized in legal collection.” “They [law firms] can
    be divided into two groups, those who are direct competitors and those who do Debt Collection at
    minor level. There are 3-5 who has Debt Collection as a main product, and they compete directly with
    DC agencies, though none of them offers Portfolio Purchase. The other part doesn't play any role in
    the market.”
320 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q15, 18, 20, Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q13,
    14, 15.
321 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q22, Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q13.
                                                      87

     market share, its offering, expertise, specialisation and strengths make Lindorff the
     most similar competitor to Intrum Justitia in qualitative terms. It is also possible that
     the Lindorff’s market shares are underestimated and in fact its position is more
     comparable to the position of Collectia.
379. The majority of customers consider that Lindorff and Intrum Justitia are among the
     top three debt collecting agents in Denmark. As explained by one of customers:
     “the current market already has a limited number of players with only three big ones
     which are able to take customers with a high number of cases. The merger will
     reduce this to two: Collectia and Intrum/Lindorff. This could affect competition and
     lead to increased prices and lowered guaranteed recovery rates, improving the
     margins of the debt collection companies.”322
380. All the competitors who responded to the market investigation indicated that Intrum
     Justitia is the market leader in Denmark and Lindorff is the second largest debt
     collection provider. All the competitors indicated that whenever they participate in a
     tender for a debt collection contract they frequently (in more than 50% of cases)
     compete in such tenders with both Intrum Justitia and Lindorff.323
381. The responses of competitors active on the Danish market do not confirm that
     Notifying Party’s claim that many competitors offer or are able to offer various
     CMS services, as the Parties do. To the contrary, most of the competitors who
     responded to the market investigation do not offer all CMS services. For example,
     some competitors indicate that credit information and scoring capabilities are
     difficult to offer because they require having large data bases. Ability to provide
     payment services seems to be even more challenging: it requires considerable IT
     development and strong platform and the ability to integrate with various
     ecosystems; all these needs in combination with strict regulatory requirements
     results in the assessment that offering payment services is expensive and heavy to
     implement.324 The Commission therefore considers that it is unlikely that a
     competitor would develop such skills simply at the request of one of its customers
     and the fact that the Parties offer services other than debt collection gives them an
     important competitive advantage.
382. Based on the results of the market investigation it may appear that switching the
     debt collection supplier is not difficult: a majority of customers indicated that when
     they were switching to a new debt collector they have not encountered any obstacles
     to the switching.325 Approximately 30% of customers, however, indicated that
     switching is not easy: due to IT costs and complexity the need for system
     integration, sharing of both physical and electronic archives and sometimes also
     contract terms. The Commission also notes that the vast majority of customers
     actually remain loyal to their incumbent debt collecting agent. Amongst the
     responding customers only a minority have changed the debt collection agent during
     the last five years and if they did, they did it only once in that period. Therefore,
     either due to convenience or to avoid more concrete obstacles and hurdles related to
     switching, it appears that customers change their debt collection supplier
322 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q22.
323 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q.27.
324 Competitor, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q6.
325 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q13.
                                                  88

     significantly less often than the duration of contracts (usually of 1 to 2 years) would
     suggest.326
383. Basically all the competitors indicated that contrary to the arguments put forward by
     the Notifying Party, an entry is unlikely.
384. An important number of customers and competitors raised concerns about the
     impact of the Transaction on the debt collection market in Denmark. They have
     provided comments similar to those: “the market is already small and if the largest
     agencies merge the competition will no longer be there…”327 Also a number of
     respondent underlined the link between debt collection and debt purchase: “there
     will be one very large player that will sit on most purchased debt.”328
385. Competitors were also quite concerned about the impact of the Transaction and the
     future position of the merged entity: “There are many competitors today but the
     market is consolidating and Intrum and Lindorff are already dominating the Danish
     market.”329 As explained by one of competitors: “with the new company would
     establish a different league of providers who can leverage on a different scale and
     data pools which both creates significant competitive advantages.”330 Another
     competitor underlined the importance of scale:
     “They will grow and will be able to invest in heavily in their CMS systems. The
     CMS business is a "big numbers game" meaning that size is important for efficiency
     and profitability. Another advantage is that they will cover the most of Europe and
     due to that be able to collect internally on international collection.”331
386. In view of the above the Commission considers that the Transaction gives rise to
     serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in relation to the
     market for debt collection in Denmark.
326 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q13.
327 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q52.
328 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q35 “There will be very few competitors and none of the
    same size [as the merged entity].” Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q29. “The merged entity
    will be able to leverage data and operational scale more than any other provider in the market. Even
    though the processed volumes may come from debt purchase the combined operational capabilities
    put the entity in a position to offer prices which could hardly be matched by incumbent providers.”
329 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q36.
330 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q36.
331 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q35
                                                         89


     customers as the market leader and Lindorff as the number 1 or number 2 debt
     purchaser.334
391. According to the sellers of debt portfolios (customers) Lindorff complies with high
     ethical standards, has excellent reputation and expertise in valuation of portfolios,
     in-depth knowledge and experience. The customers indicated that it is important for
     them that Lindorff ensures a fair professional handling of their customers.335
     Lindorff’s strengths include the fact that it is large, financially strong and present in
     a number of countries. Intrum Justitia is considered to have very similar features: it
     is considered to respect high ethical standards, it has a good reputation, is present in
     many countries and is considered to be professional and financially strong.
     Competitors were not able to identify any weaknesses in Intrum Justitia or in
     Lindorff.336
392. All these features are very important for the debt sellers. Contrary to the Notifying
     Party’s claim that competition takes place with each new tender and that the current
     market shares and the track record do not reflect market power, the market
     investigation results demonstrate that track record, reputation and scale of the
     potential purchasers are very important for debt selling customers. Companies who
     do not comply with these requirements would not even be invited to participate in a
     tender and they would not even be considered in the context of bilateral
     negotiations.
393. Furthermore the market investigation results for Denmark confirmed that the strong
     position of the Parties in debt collection gives them a significant competitive
     advantage on the debt purchasing market. In particular it is recognised that the debt
     collecting agents have the experience from managing the cases concerned and are
     best placed to correctly price the portfolio. Furthermore, they know the client and
     have all the necessary processes and workflows in place (potentially tested and
     improved over time to best meet the customer’s requirements). Lastly some
     respondents indicated that penalty fees may apply if the seller takes away the
     portfolio from the current debt collecting agent in transfer it to a third party debt
     purchaser.337 Some competitors indicated that up to 70% of portfolios would be sold
     to the collector. Another competitor explained that “if prices offered are at least
     equal or close to equal the seller will sell to the servicer” [for reasons listed
     above].338
394. The market investigation results do not confirm the Notifying Party’s submission
     that barriers to entry are low and the ability to value debt portfolios are not country
     specific. The competitors underlined that for the valuation of portfolios it is very
     important to have the debt collection activity in place. It is very helpful for
     gathering the data.339
334 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q53.
335 Customers, Denmark – Questionnaire 9, Q44.
336 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q53.
337 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q50. “If you have worked on the cases your knowledge of
    the cases is way better – and you will be able to price portfolio correct.” [disadvantages of selling to a
    debt purchaser other than the current debt collector: “penalty fee in connection with terminating a
    collection contract + logistics of the transfer.”
338 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q51.
339 Competitors, Denmark – Questionnaire 1, Q71.2.
                                                        91


     financial stability and collection methods of the purchasers.343 Responses from
     competitors suggest that bilateral negotiations may be less common in Germany
     than in the Nordic markets. It is thought that sellers would only sell small portfolios
     this way, whilst for larger portfolios it is standard practice to hold a tender
     procedure.344
399. Both one-off and forward-flow debt sales are very common on the German market,
     and customers’ responses illustrated a wide range of strategies for dealing with debt.
     Companies that sell debt on a one-off basis typically assess the debt they hold on a
     yearly basis. They assess whether selling the debt is predicted to generate a higher
     return than continuing to collect on it, but may also take into account punctual
     considerations, such as market conditions and the need to generate one-off profits or
     improve the balance sheet.
400. The link between debt collection and debt purchasing seems to be similar in
     Germany to that described in the Nordic markets, although probably a bit weaker.
     The majority of customers have sold to their debt collection provider at some point
     in the past, and most consider there to be advantages to selling to the current
     purchaser, both in terms of the speed and convenience of the process, and likelihood
     of obtaining a better price for the portfolio.345 Competitors also recognised that it
     was easier for customers to sell to the current debt collection provider, and
     emphasised the superior ability of the debt collector to value the portfolio accurately
     and submit a competitive bid.346 A significant number of competitors reported that a
     large proportion of their debt purchasing business comes from debt collection
     customers.347 A minority of customers were, however, concerned by the risk of a
     conflict of interest and therefore avoided selling to their debt collector.348 Some
     competitors also pointed out that, while the debt collector may have certain
     advantages, the price would still need to be right, otherwise the seller would look for
     another purchaser.349
401. A very large majority of customers in Germany mentioned reputation and price as
     the two most important criteria when evaluating the suitability of a potential debt
     purchaser.350 Reputation is seen as being of particular importance as companies
     expect their customers to be treated in the way that they would have treated them
     themselves. The ability to perform debt collection in-house and the quality and
     integration of IT systems were also mentioned as very important criteria by a
     significant minority of respondents.351
402. Competitors also emphasised the importance of reputation on the debt purchasing
     market, with the majority considering it to be essential or very important for
343 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q3.1.
344 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q34.1 and Q34.2.
345 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q12-13.
346 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q16.
347 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q15 and Q34.2.
348 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q12. “We have never sold or even offered a portfolio to a
    debt collector that had an active contract with us. This has allowed us to ensure that the debt collector
    is not faced with a potential conflict of interest.” Concerns of this type were not voiced by the
    customers in the Nordic countries.
349 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q16.1 and Q16.2.
350 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q9.
351 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q9.
                                                         93

     competing successfully. The other characteristics seen as most important by
     competitors were databases and the ability to analyse portfolios; and also industry
     knowledge, local market knowledge, IT systems and understanding of local
     culture.352
403. Lindorff and Intrum Justitia were among the potential debt buyers often mentioned
     by customers as their preferred choice, but they were two from among a number of
     competitors all mentioned by a large number of customers as strong competitors.
     The others included EOS (which was most often highest ranked), Hoist, PRA Group
     and GFKL. In addition to this leading group, there were also a large number of other
     players that were each mentioned by a couple of respondents. These included
     KRUK, Zyklop, Link, Arvato, ForInso and Proceed. It was also noticeable that
     many respondents did not have any particular preference for one purchaser over
     another within those they considered the leading competitors.353 This is consistent
     with the practice of inviting all potential purchasers that fulfil certain basic criteria,
     and then choosing the final purchaser more on the basis of price.
404. Competitors’ views on the strongest players on the market largely coincided with
     those of customers. The three purchasers on average ranked highest were EOS,
     Lindorff and GFKL. A number of competitors also mentioned Infoscore, Intrum
     Justitia, Hoist, PRA Group, Creditreform and Universum. This again suggests that
     the Parties are two of a fairly large and evenly-matched leading group of debt
     purchasers.354
405. Lindorff is generally regarded as a strong competitor on the German market.
     Customers see Lindorff as a professional, reliable company, with high quality,
     automated processes.355 It is known to be particular focused on the banking sector.
     Intrum Justitia was sometimes mentioned by customers as being amongst Lindorff’s
     main competitors, but a number of other competitors, including EOS, GFKL,
     Infoscore, PRA Group and Hoist were mentioned more frequently. 356 Competitors
     also consider Lindorff to be particularly strong in the banking sector, and see its
     financial capacity as being its major strength.357 The companies named by
     competitors as closest competitor to Lindorff were largely the same as those named
     by customers, with GFKL and EOS featuring most strongly, alongside Intrum and a
     number of other players.358
406. Customers were generally less familiar with Intrum Justitia than with Lindorff
     (which is consistent with its lower market share) and there was some suggestion that
     it is more active in debt collection than debt purchasing. Those who did have a view
     on Intrum Justitia generally considered it to have a very good reputation. The
     characteristics most often noted, such as professionalism and reliability, were very
     similar to those mentioned for Lindorff.359 Whilst Lindorff was mentioned as being
352 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q14.
353 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q10.
354 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q18.
355 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q16.
356 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q18.
357 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q18, Q6.
358 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q20.
359 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q19.
                                                   94

     amongst Intrum Justitia’s closest competitors, a number of other companies,
     including PRA, Hoist, EOS and GFKL were named more often.360
407. Competitors also saw Intrum Justitia as a slightly weaker player than Lindorff, and
     mention it having more of a focus on debt collection. Some do not consider Intrum
     Justitia to be in the leading group in Germany.361 The companies mentioned by
     competitors as being close competitors to Intrum Justitia were largely the same as
     those named by customers, but quite a number respondents did not have views on
     Intrum Justitia’s closest competitors, possibly reflecting the fact that it is not itself
     seen as a major competitor.362
408. Some customers also considered private equity firms or other large financial
     investors as potential purchasers of their debt portfolios, but opinions were divided
     on this point. Some customers were also aware of large investors working with debt
     collection agencies.363
409. The German debt purchasing market is perceived by both competitors and
     customers as being a very dynamic, competitive market. Customers observe that
     prices have increased in recent years, and note that new entrants have entered the
     market.364 Competitors also comment on the large number of players active on the
     market, and see an increasing preference for selling debt rather than outsourcing it
     for external collection.365
410. Only a very small minority of customers envisage the Transaction having any
     impact on the market for debt purchasing in Germany. The vast majority are
     unconcerned as they feel that there is sufficient competition on the market for the
     loss of one competitor not to have any effect on prices or service. Even those
     respondents who do express the view that there may be consequences refer very
     generally to the potential risks of losing one competitor, but are not by any means
     convinced that this particular merger will actually cause any impact to be felt by
     customers, i.e. debt sellers.366
411. Some competitors voiced concerns related mainly to the scale advantage that the
     merged entity will have, particularly due to its strength in debt collection and debt
     purchasing.367 These arguments would, however, appear to be negated by the
     Parties’ very modest combined position in debt collection in Germany. Furthermore,
     they are not consistent with competitors’ own views that Intrum Justitia is not really
     a ‘tier 1’ competitor in debt purchasing in Germany,368 as is reflected in the market
     shares (with Intrum Justitia bringing an increment of only [0-5]% in value and [5-
360 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q21.
361 Competitor, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q22.2.
362 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q21.
363 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q11-13.
364 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q9 and Q22.
365 Competitors, Germany – Q37, Q37.1 and Q13. “The German market is a very competitive
    environment with around 60 players active.”
366 Customers, Germany – Questionnaire 14, Q24-25. “In Germany the competition is still strong
    (average of more than 15 potential buyers in each tender)” Q25
367 Competitors, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q38-39.
368 “Intrum is only a middle player with a lot of internal problems in the last few years in the German
    market.” Competitor, Germany – Questionnaire 6, Q38.
                                                       95


416. The characteristics of the Netherlands debt purchasing market are very similar to
     those described for Germany. Most debt sales are agreed following a closed tender
     procedure, where the seller invites a number of known and trusted potential
     purchasers to submit initial bids. Customers in the Netherlands have very similar
     concerns to those in Germany, in terms of ensuring that debtors continue to be
     treated correctly even when the debt has been sold on, and therefore prefer to invite
     only purchasers that have been pre-assessed.372 Customers in the Netherlands do
     also sometimes enter into bilateral negotiations with a specific purchaser, most often
     their debt collector.373
417. Both one-off debt sales and forward flow agreements are common in the
     Netherlands. The number of bidders invited can be slightly lower than in Germany,
     with most often around five, and rarely more than ten, potential purchasers invited
     to submit offers.374
418. The majority of customers have, at some point in the past, sold debt portfolios to
     their debt collector.375 A number of customers have only ever sold to their debt
     collection provider. The following reasons explain preferring to sell to the debt
     collector: the debt collector’s knowledge of the portfolio often means they can offer
     a better price; selling to the existing collector minimises reputational risk, as the
     end-customer (i.e. the debtor) continues to be contacted by the same company
     before and after the sale; the data on the individual cases has already been
     transferred, thus avoiding additional administrative work; collection results are
     likely to be better thanks to the debt collector’s experience with the debtors (which
     again allows the debt collector to offer a better price); risk allocation is easier to
     negotiate as both parties know the portfolio; and selling to a purchaser that is not the
     current debt collector may entail penalties or fees.376
419. Competitors’ views on the practice of selling to the debt collector were somewhat
     more mixed, although all respondents acknowledged that it was easier and possibly
     more profitable for a collection customer to take this approach. 377 Similarly to
     customers, competitors felt that less experienced sellers would be more likely to sell
     to their debt collector.378
420. The competitive landscape in the Netherlands is characterised by the presence of a
     number of strong competitors, none of which is a stand-out leader. Customers on
     average ranked the Parties highest in their listing of top competitors, but a number
     of other players were also very close to them, namely Arrow, Direct Pay and Hoist.
     In addition to this group of major players, customers also named a range of other
372 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q3.
373 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q3.1.
374 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q6.
375 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q13.
376 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q12. “An advantage the current debt collector might
    have over other investors is the collection data and experience.”
377 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q16-17. “As the debt collector has all the information
    about the debtors, action taken to date, payment history etc. it has a huge advantage over third
    parties.”
378 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q16.2.
                                                         97

     competitors, including Infoscore, Alektum and Arvato, who they would also
     consider selling to.379
421. Competitors also named a number of players that they consider to be strong actors
     on the Dutch debt purchasing market. Lindorff was most often named as the top
     competitor, whilst Intrum was amongst a fairly large group of other strong
     competitors, including Arrow, Hoist, Fiducré, PRA and DirectPay.380
422. Reputation and price are generally considered as by far the most important criteria
     for choosing a debt purchaser (both rated as ‘very important’ by a majority of
     customers who responded). National or local knowledge and the ability to perform
     debt collection are both also considered important or very important by a significant
     proportion of respondents.381 Competitors confirmed that international investment
     companies are active on the Dutch market, and that they often buy in partnership
     with debt collectors.382
423. According to competitors, the main skills needed to compete effectively in the
     Netherlands debt purchasing market are: i) the ability to value the portfolio (for
     which a benchmark database and scoring models are needed); ii) the financial
     capacity to bid; and iii) the operational capacity to collect on large volumes of
     cases.383 In terms of specific competences, competitors’ views were largely in line
     with those of customers. The three criteria considered essential by a majority of
     competitors were databases, industry knowledge and local market knowledge.
     Understanding of local culture, reputation, IT systems, the ability to analyse
     portfolios and in-house collection capability are also all essential or very important
     for some competitors.384
424. The vast majority of customers consider Lindorff to have a very good reputation, a
     large customer base and a good capital position. It is described as trustworthy,
     respectable, professional, experienced and reputable. A small number of
     respondents do, however, mention that its prices are too low. The fact that it has its
     own debt collection capacity and is known for good practice in debt collection is
     also seen as an important strength.385 Further strengths are its IT systems, large
     customer database, industry knowledge, capacity, international presence and full
     range of services (legal and amicable collection). Customers consider Arrow (which
     has recently acquired Vesting Finance in the Netherlands) to be Lindorff’s closest
     competitor, followed by Intrum Justitia and Hoist.386
425. Competitors perceive Lindorff as a strong, experienced player, which has the
     financial capacity needed to compete effectively in debt collection. The
     development of debt collection platforms is, however, seen by some as a
379 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q10.
380 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q18.
381 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q9.
382 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q25.
383 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q7.
384 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q14.
385 “Strong focus on both respectful and effective communication towards debtors”
    “Lindorff will not put our reputation at stake, which makes for a good relationship with debtors”
    Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q16-17.
386 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q18.
                                                      98

     weakness.387 The closest competitors to Lindorff, from competitors’ point of view,
     are Hoist, Arrow and Intrum Justitia.388
426. Customers generally appear to be less familiar with Intrum Justitia than with
     Lindorff. Most consider it to be one of the large, respectable firms, and describe it as
     professional and experienced. A small number have, however, had bad experiences,
     and there is some suggestion that Intrum is less active in the Netherlands than in
     other geographic markets. Its main strength is seen as being its industry knowledge
     and experience, large databases and the provision of a range of services (amicable
     and legal collection). Its main weakness is its lack of a clear profile or direction. A
     number of customers also associate Intrum Justitia more with the provision of bulk
     services (mainly debt collection) rather than debt purchasing. It is thought of as
     inflexible by some customers.389 Customers consider Intrum Justitia’s closest
     competitors to be Lindorff and Arrow (Vesting Finance), followed by Hoist, Direct
     Pay and Infoscore.390
427. Competitors’ views on Intrum Justitia are very similar to those of customers. It is
     generally considered to have a good reputation, but some say that it lacks experience
     in the financial debt purchasing market and that it has had some reputational
     issues.391 Competitors see Lindorff, Arrow and Hoist as Intrum Justitia’s closest
     competitors.392
428. Most customers in the Netherlands are very happy with the current market
     conditions and go as far as to call it a ‘sellers’ market’.393 They mention that the
     number of interested buyers has increased, including as a result of foreign investors
     entering the Dutch market.394 The general consensus is that the market is very
     competitive and sellers are able to get good prices for their portfolios. Some
     competitors also expect to see more international investment companies enter the
     market in the coming years.395
429. A large majority of customers in the Netherlands say that the Transaction will have
     no impact on the market. For the small minority which expressed concerns, these
     related mainly to the Parties combined resources in terms of databases. Competitors’
     responses confirm this picture: a small number set a minimum amount above which
     they are interested, whilst the majority say that the size of the portfolio is not of
     particular importance.396
430. The majority of competitors are of the opinion that the Transaction will have an
     impact on the market. The main reasons for their concern are the merged entities
     combined strength in debt collection and debt purchasing, and its ability to leverage
387 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q19.
388 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q20.
389 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q19-20.
390 Customers, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q21.
391 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q19.
392 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q21.
393 Customer, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q23. “It is a sellers' market at the moment. Parties are
    interested and the prices offered are satisfactory” Customer, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q23.
394 Customer, Netherlands – Questionnaire 15, Q23. “The number of interested debt purchasing
    companies (both national as international) is strongly increasing.”
395 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q37.1.
396 Competitors, Netherlands – Questionnaire 7, Q4.
                                                         99


     2013.399 The market is therefore analysed as an affected market, but it can already at
     the outset be noted that the Parties’ market shares are not generally especially high,
     and have declined considerably in recent years, from [20-30]% (by value) in 2013
     (based on an uncorrected market size), to [10-20]% in 2014, and further to [5-10]%
     in 2015, with Lindorff winning no new tenders in 2015.
435. The debt purchasing market in Spain is slightly different in nature to the markets in
     the other countries in question in this case. Debt sales from banks account for the
     vast majority of the portfolios sold, and sales of secured debt are more common than
     in the other markets, in particular the Nordic markets where banks very rarely sell
     secured debt. The competitors which responded to the market investigation had only
     ever purchased debt from banks, although at least some of them would also be
     interested in purchasing from other sectors such as utilities and telecoms.400 Banking
     debt is generally considered the most attractive for buyers. 401 Furthermore, the value
     for which debt portfolios are sold (as a percentage of face value) is very low relative
     to the other markets. The very low prices which can be obtained for unsecured debt
     portfolios in particular also have an effect on the whole functioning of the market,
     and in particular on sellers’ approach to debt sales.
436. Similarly to in other markets, debt sales can be concluded following either closed
     tender procedures or bilateral negotiations. Relative to sellers in other countries,
     Spanish debt sellers are more inclined to enlist the services of an advisor to help
     them in the organisation of tender procedures.402 Where sellers instead choose to
     enter into bilateral negotiations with a single potential purchaser, the motivation is
     also, at least sometimes, slightly different to in other countries, as sellers sometimes
     choose to sell to the same buyer as they know they won’t get a better price
     elsewhere, so it would not be worth investing time and resources in a tender
     procedure.403 Nonetheless, bilateral negotiations do often take place with the current
     debt collector, and, as in other markets, there is a clear link between debt collection
     and debt purchasing, although perhaps not as strong as in other markets.404
437. A large majority of customers who responded had sold to their current debt collector
     at some point in the past. The reasons for choosing to do so mainly related to
     convenience and price, and also the assurance provided by working with a party you
     already have experience with. Spanish customers see there being a number of
     advantages in selling to their existing debt collector, namely that they may be able
     to submit a higher bid due to their knowledge of the portfolio, the process will be
     smoother, and any reputational risk to the seller is reduced.405 Respondents did,
     however, also mention that the current debt collection provider’s knowledge of the
399 Percentage of tenders of which the Parties are aware won: 2013: [30-40]% by volume, [20-30]% by
    value; 2014: [10-20]% by volume, [10-20]% by value; 2015: [5-10]% by volume, [5-10]% by value.
400 Competitor, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q6.
401 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q4.1.
402 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q3-4. Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q34.
403 Customer, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q3.1.
404 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q13.
405 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q12-13.
                                                     101

     portfolio may mean that it offers a lower price,406 and if this is the case they are
     likely to sell to another buyer.407
438. Competitors also gave a slightly more nuanced picture of the link between debt
     purchasing and debt collection than was seen in many other markets. Although
     competitors acknowledge the advantages from a customer’s point of view of selling
     to their existing debt collector, some respondents were not yet active in debt
     collection in Spain, or had only become active recently, and did not perceive this as
     a major problem.408 Competitors do, however, recognise that the current debt
     collector is better placed to value the portfolio and that customers may favour them
     for reasons of convenience and due to the fact that they have already established a
     relationship and know the collection practices of this provider.409
439. As mentioned above, sales of secured debt are much more common in Spain than in
     the other markets discussed in this case, and the same banks often sell both secured
     and unsecured debt.410 Customers make a broad general distinction between the
     competitors they consider to be potential purchasers of secured and unsecured debt
     respectively. The main buyers of secured debt are investment funds, venture capital
     funds and banks, whilst the typical competitors in unsecured debt are debt collection
     agencies. Customers explain that this is due to the need for local debt collection
     operations for competing in unsecured debt portfolios. Some respondents note that
     investment funds do also compete for unsecured portfolios, but the debt collection
     companies are seen as the most competitive players in this area.411 Competitors also
     confirm this distinction. Financial institutions are perceived as being interested in
     secured or mixed portfolios, whereas debt collection companies focus mainly on
     unsecured debt.412
440. One of the notable specificities of the Spanish market is the general absence of
     forward-flow sales. The vast majority of debt sales are one-off agreements, and
     sales are usually financially motivated rather than being part of a more general
     strategy. Banks typically compare the expected return on collection on a particular
     portfolio with the price they could expect to get, given the market conditions at any
     particular moment in time, and then decide whether to sell on this basis.413
441. The sheer number of competitors present in debt purchasing in Spain also
     distinguishes this market from most of the others considered in this case, in
     particular the Nordic markets. Whereas in the Nordic markets, a seller might invite
     all the potential purchasers it considers suitable to bid, in Spain debt sellers are
     conscious of the need to restrict the number of bidders they invite, in order to
     encourage participation.
406 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q12.3.
407 Customer, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q12.1 “We have included our current debt collector in our debt
    sales tenders, but they have not always offered the best bid.”
408 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q15. “In Spain there are several investors which do not have
    their own debt collection operations but which buy portfolios. They use external servicers.” Q16.1.
409 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q16-17.
410 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q6.
411 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q7.1.
412 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q6.
413 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q4.
                                                       102

442. When organising tender procedures, sellers usually invite between 10 and 20
     potential purchasers to bid, although there can even be up to 50 invited bidders. 414
     The competitors most often named by customers as their preferred buyers included
     Axactor, Gescobro (Cerverus), Hoist, KRUK, Grove Capital and the Parties. A
     range of other competitors were also mentioned, and some customers indicated that
     they do not see a great deal of differentiation between the different players.415
     Competitors generally made slightly more of a distinction between the major actors
     on the Spanish market, with Lindorff, EOS and Axactor often perceived as the
     strongest players. They also, however, named a large number of other purchasers
     regarded as strong competitors, including Intrum Justitia, Cabot, Gescobro
     (Cerverus) and PRA Group.416 Nonetheless, similarly to customers, some
     competitors did note that there were too many competitors present on the Spanish
     market to be able to have any overview or to rank them in terms of their market
     position.417
443. The vast majority of Spanish customers consider international private equity firms
     and asset management companies to be suitable potential purchasers for debt
     portfolios. Competitors also see international investment firms as important actors
     on the Spanish debt market, and observe that they usually purchase in cooperation
     with debt collection providers.418
444. The criteria considered most important by Spanish customers when evaluating the
     suitability of a possible buyer are reputation and price (both judged to be important
     or very important by the vast majority of respondents). Industry knowledge and the
     level of capital held were also important to a significant number of respondents.419
445. Competitors consider internal databases and the ability to analyse portfolios to be
     the most important requirements for competing successfully on the debt purchasing
     market in Spain. They also note the importance of in-house collection capacity, IT
     systems, industry knowledge and local market knowledge.420
446. The majority of customers perceive Lindorff as a major player, with expertise and a
     long track record in the debt purchasing business. They cite its major strengths as
     being its capacity, technology, experience and good analytical skills. A small
     minority of customers do, however, also note that Lindorff’s reputation has suffered
     slightly in Spain due to some recent management issues, but these are understood to
     have been resolved.421 Intrum Justitia is also generally seen as a strong competitor,
     although there is some divergence of opinion as to its commitment to the Spanish
     market, with a minority saying that it has not focused particularly on the Spanish
     market in recent years. Its main strengths are perceived as being its expertise in
     valuation, size, experience, reputation, knowledge of the Spanish market and
     international presence. Competitors generally view Lindorff as the market leader,
     and comment on is experience and reputation amongst customers. Intrum Justitia is
414 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q6.
415 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q10.
416 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q18.
417 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q18.1. “there are too many competitors in this market.”
418 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q26.1.
419 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q9.
420 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q14.
421 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q16-17.
                                                     103

     also considered to be an experienced player, with the necessary capital to
     compete.422
447. In terms of closeness of competition, customers generally view Lindorff and Intrum
     Justitia as two of a fairly large group including Gescobro (Cerverus), PRA, KRUK,
     Link Capital, Axactor, Grove, Cabot, Aiqon, EOS and Hoist, which they see as all
     being fairly comparable, and equally close competitors to the Parties. The Parties
     are not therefore seen as closer competitors to each other than either is to any other
     of these and a range of other players.423
448. Competitors do not generally regard Intrum Justitia as one of Lindorff’s main
     competitors. They instead consider Axactor, Cabot and EOS to be closer
     competitors to Lindorff. Lindorff is however, named as one of Intrum’s main
     competitors, alongside KRUK, EOS, Cabot and Axactor. Overall, competitors did
     not emphasise any particular characteristic that would make Lindorff and Intrum
     Justitia closer competitors than either is to any other of the major debt purchasers.424
449. The vast majority of customers think that the Transaction will have no impact on the
     Spanish debt purchasing market, and even those who consider some effect possible
     recognise that it is likely to be limited by the number of other competitors present,
     and do not in fact have any concerns.425 Most respondents also note that prices are
     currently rising on the Spanish debt purchasing market. Customers have seen the
     interest in debt purchases grow over the last 3-4 years, with experienced players
     from other markets starting to compete in Spain.426 This has further increased the
     already wide choice of possible purchasers.
450. A number of competitors were also of the opinion that further new competitors from
     either other European countries or the US are likely to enter the Spanish market.
     Competitors note that Spain is one of the three biggest debt purchasing markets in
     Europe, and is as such attractive for investors.427
451. Some competitors were of the opinion that the Transaction will have an impact on
     the market. Their concerns related mainly to the Parties’ strength in debt collection
     and debt purchasing, and the advantage this will give them in terms of the
     combination of their in-house data resources.428 Whilst it is true that the Parties
     have, together, a relatively strong position in debt collection for financial
     institutions (with a combined market share of around [10-20]% in 2015, although
422 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q19.
423 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q18 and Q21.
424 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q20-21.
425 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q24. “There are many other companies that compete [in
    addition to the Parties].”
426 Customers, Spain – Questionnaire 16, Q23. “During the last 3-4 years there has been a clear appetite
    for purchasing in Spain, which has, from our point of view, helped us to conclude all our debt sales
    successfully.” “We have seen the arrival of experienced players (already active and present in other
    European markets) in the Spanish market.”
427 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q13 and Q37.1. “Competitors from the US/Eastern Europe
    that so far have not been active in Spain may enter the market.”
428 Competitors, Spain – Questionnaire 8, Q22 and Q38-40.
    “We believe that the merged entity will be in a very strong position in the market in Spain, because
    the combination of being a debt servicer and a debt purchaser gives them a hugely dominant position
    regarding data and regarding pricing of portfolios.”
                                                       104

     not leading to an affected market429), only a very small increment ([0-5]%) was
     brought by Intrum Justitia. Furthermore, a combined market share of less than [20-
     30]% shows that the Parties are by no means dominant on the debt collection
     market, and there are a large number of other competitors active in debt purchasing
     with similar expertise in debt collection, such as EOS Group, Axactor, KRUK,
     Cabot and Gescobro. Overall, given the number of both national and international
     players active on the Spanish debt purchasing market, and the apparent lack of
     significant differentiation between them, it appears highly unlikely that the merged
     entity would be able to use its combined data resources to influence prices on the
     market.
452. In conclusion, there are a very large number of competitors active on the market,
     including strong international players, and sellers are often served by advisors, who
     have a detailed knowledge of the market and can thus ensure they obtain the best
     possible price for their portfolios. Both the practice of using advisors, and the
     relatively high number of purchaser usually invited to bid in tenders, also makes the
     market especially open and competitive.
453. In view of the above the Commission considers that the Transaction does not give
     rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in relation to
     the market for debt purchasing in Spain.
V.    PROPOSED REMEDIES
454. In order to render the concentration compatible with the internal market, the
     undertakings concerned have modified the notified concentration by entering into
     the following commitments, which are annexed to this decision and form an integral
     part thereof (the “Commitments”).
455. In view of addressing the concerns identified during the market investigation, the
     Notifying Party has committed to divest the full overlap between Lindorff and
     Intrum Justitia in both the debt collection and the debt purchasing markets, in
     Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Norway and Sweden, i.e. in all five countries in which
     competition concerns were identified. In particular, the Commitments involve the
     divestment of the entire CMS (including debt collection) business and debt
     purchasing business of Lindorff in Denmark, Estonia, Finland and Sweden, and of
     the entire CMS (including debt collection) business and debt purchasing business of
     Intrum Justitia in Norway. Regarding debt collection, the remedy package includes
     both debt collection performed on third party’s debt and on debt owned by the
     divested business in the relevant country. All assets and operations to be divested
     under the Commitments are referred to as the “Divestment Business”.
456. In particular, the Divestment Business includes in each market (where present):
     tangible assets (external debt collection contracts, other CMS contracts, historic debt
     portfolios, rental agreements for office premises); intangible assets (collection
     systems, payment and invoicing systems, customer and credit records, IT system
     and valuation models, debt collection/consumer credit licences); and employment
     contracts (including those related to the management teams).
429 Market shares in debt collection in the financial sector: 2015: Lindorff [10-20]%, Intrum Justitia [0-
    5]%; 2014: Lindorff [10-20]%, Intrum [0-5]%; 2013: Lindorff 5-10%, Intrum [0-5]%.
                                                       105

457. In addition, the Divestment Business includes a licence for the use of the Lindorff
     brand name in Denmark, Estonia, Finland and Sweden, and of the Intrum Justitia
     brand name in Norway for up to […] years, together with other transitional
     arrangements for the supply of IT services (currently shared by various entities
     owned by the respective Parties) and a licence for the third party collection system
     in Denmark, which is operated by Lindorff Norway (not part of the Divestment
     Business).
458. In order to guarantee the viability and the competitiveness of the Divestment
     Business the Notifying Party also commits to (i) a best effort obligation to secure
     the transfer to the purchaser of debt collection and debt portfolios contracts
     containing change of control / ownership provisions; (ii) a non-compete obligation
     for collection customers invoking a change of control provision at the time of the
     transfer; (iii) a non-solicit obligation in relation to the key personnel included in the
     Divestment Business.
459. The Divestment Business does not include certain functions, contracts and products
     related to Lindorff’s group-wide activities, and employees who work exclusively for
     Lindorff Group related functions, including legal and compliance, IT, human
     resources and the Shared Service Centre.
460. For a complete description of the Divestment Business and all its assets, see the full
     text of the attached Commitments.
461. The table below contains financial information for the Divestment Business.
     Table 21: Financial information for the Divestment Business (2016-2018)
     Country           Figures EUR              2016              2017          2018
                          million              Actual          Forecast       Forecast
     Finland         Net revenue              [amount]         [amount]       [amount]
                     EBITDA margin           [margin]%        [margin]%      [margin]%
     Estonia         Net revenue              [amount]         [amount]       [amount]
                     EBITDA margin           [margin]%        [margin]%      [margin]%
     Sweden          Net revenue              [amount]         [amount]       [amount]
                     EBITDA margin           [margin]%        [margin]%      [margin]%
     Denmark         Net revenue              [amount]         [amount]       [amount]
                     EBITDA margin           [margin]%        [margin]%      [margin]%
     Norway          Net revenue              [amount]         [amount]       [amount]
                     EBITDA margin           [margin]%        [margin]%      [margin]%
462. In addition the Notifying Party has entered into related commitments, inter alia
     regarding the separation of the divested businesses from their retained businesses,
     the preservation of the viability, marketability and competitiveness of the divested
     businesses, including the appointment of a monitoring trustee and, if necessary, a
     divestiture trustee.
463. The Notifying Party submits that the Commitments will eliminate the competition
     concerns entirely since the sale of the Divestment Business will entirely remove the
     overlap between the activities of Lindorff and Intrum Justitia in the affected
     markets. The Notifying Party submits that the Commitments are therefore
     comprehensive and effective from all points of view since they include all assets
     and staff that contribute to the current operation and/or that are necessary to ensure
     the viability and competitiveness of the Divestment Business. Furthermore, it is
                                                    106

     submitted that such Commitments are capable of being implemented effectively
     within a short period of time since the Divestment Business involves a structural
     remedy of an existing business performed by existing legal entities.
464. Moreover the Notifying Party commits to sell or procure the sale of the Divestment
     Business to one single suitable Purchaser. The Notifying Party submits that the
     scope of the remedy includes all that is required to compete effectively, regardless
     of the identity of the ultimate buyer. Therefore the Divestment Business will
     continue as a competitive force on the market under the control of a third party
     purchaser, able to continue to exercise competitive pressure on the merged entity in
     the affected countries post-Transaction.
VI. ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPOSED REMEDIES
465. The Commission analysed the suitability of the Commitments to remedy serious
     doubts in this case against the standard set out in the Commission Notice on
     Remedies.430
VI.1. Framework for the Commission’s assessment of the Commitments
466. Where a notified concentration raises serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
     internal market, the parties may modify the notified concentration so as to remove
     the grounds for serious doubts identified by the Commission, with a view to having
     the concentration declared compatible with the internal market pursuant to
     Article 6(1)(b) in conjunction with Article 6(2) of the Merger Regulation.
467. In assessing whether or not the commitments will restore effective competition, the
     Commission considers their type, scale and scope, with reference to the structure
     and the particular characteristics of the market in which the Commission has
     identified serious doubts as to the compatibility of the notified concentration with
     the internal market.431
468. Divestiture commitments are the best way to eliminate serious doubts resulting from
     horizontal overlaps in the merging parties’ activities.432 Other commitments (such as
     licensing) may be suitable to resolve serious doubts if these commitments are
     equivalent to divestitures in their effects. The divested activities must consist of a
     viable business that, if operated by a suitable purchaser, can compete effectively
     with the merged entity on a lasting basis and that is divested as a going concern.433
469. The business to be divested must include all the assets which contribute to its
     current operation or which are necessary to ensure its viability and competitiveness,
     and all personnel which are currently employed or which are currently shared
     between the business to be divested and other businesses of the parties, but which
     contribute to the operation of the business or which are necessary to ensure its
     viability and competitiveness. Otherwise, the viability and competitiveness of the
     business to be divested would be endangered. The business to be divested must
430 Commission Notice on remedies acceptable under Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 and under
    Commission Regulation (EC) No 802/2004 (2008/C 267/01), (the “Commission Notice on
    Remedies”).
431 Commission Notice on Remedies, paragraph 9.
432 Commission Notice on Remedies, paragraph 17.
433 Commission Notice on Remedies, paragraph 23.
                                                  107

     therefore include the staff that perform essential roles for the business, at least in a
     sufficient proportion to meet the ongoing needs of the business to be divested.434
470. Furthermore, the intended effect of the divestiture will only be achieved if and once
     the business is transferred to a suitable purchaser with the ability to maintain and
     develop the business to be divested as a viable and active competitive undertaking.
VI.2. Results of the market test
471. To assess the suitability of the Commitments to remove serious doubts in this case,
     the Commission launched a market test on 18 May 2017.
472. The market test indicated that the Commitments proposed in this case are suitable
     overall, in that they include all the necessary assets, and provide for the divestiture
     of the standalone debt purchasing and CMS businesses (including debt collection)
     currently owned by Lindorff in Estonia, Denmark, Finland and Sweden, and by
     Intrum Justitia in Norway.435
473. The results of the market test were positive as regards the feasibility of the transfer
     and the viability of the Divestment Business. However, many respondents have
     identified the need to guarantee that the Divestment Business includes adequate
     support / coordination functions, which are generally managed at the group level
     and may not be included in the national businesses.436
474. The majority of respondents also confirmed that a suitable purchaser would be able
     to integrate the Divestment Business and to successfully rebrand during a […]-year
     period. Brand is recognized as being a very important asset and it is generally
     thought that the Divestment Business will benefit from the brand licensing
     agreement and will be able to manage the transition after the license expires. 437
475. The market test confirmed that the Commitments are sufficient to generate a new
     competitive force in the market. The majority of customers responding to the market
     test would consider signing a debt collection contract with the Divestment Business
     or selling their debt portfolios to it.438 The majority of customers also considered
     that the Divestment Business would be strong enough to exert a competitive
     pressure similar to the one existing pre-Transaction.439
476. The market test revealed that the risk of key personnel leaving the Divestment
     Business in order to join the merged entity could endanger the viability of the
434 Commission Notice on Remedies, paragraphs 25 and 26.
435 Customers – Questionnaire R2, Q3. For example, “I think yes your proposed commitments would
    benefit the market.” “This solution will give us another sufficiently large alternative supplier, and will
    therefore keep the level of competition to a level very close to today.”
    Competitors – Questionnaire R1, Q4.
436 Competitors – Questionnaire R1, Q9. “[The] Divestment Business needs to be sufficiently equipped
    with central/coordinating functions across its various businesses in order to fully function. If to be
    acquired by an industrial player such as us, this requirement is, of course, less important vs. e.g. a
    financial investor.”
437 Competitors – Questionnaire R1, Q20-22. “[…] years should be long enough for rebranding.”
    Customers – Questionnaire R2, Q7-8. “Both brands well rooted on the market, but [the proposed]
    time frame allows market information and adaption of new brand.”
438 Customers – Questionnaire R2, Q4-6.
439 Customers – Questionnaire R2, Q16.
                                                        108

     remedy. Such personnel possess the relevant business know-how and typically keep
     the relationship with the customers. Thus, further actions to mitigate of the
     described risk are needed to ensure the effective implementation of the remedy
     proposal.440
477. The vast majority of respondents considered the transitional agreements included in
     the Divestment Business to be sufficient in scope and duration for the purchaser to
     be able, subsequently, to operate the business independently.441
478. The market test further indicated that the composition of the Divestment Business,
     i.e. it being a mix of Lindorff and Intrum Justitia businesses, does not affect its
     attractiveness or viability. Respondents overall do not believe this could endanger
     the viability and the competitiveness of the Divestment Business. In particular, they
     confirmed the Notifying Party’s view that the businesses are operated at national
     level, and that the purchaser would therefore need to integrate five separate
     business, each with its own systems and processes, irrespective of which of the
     Parties business is sold in which country.442
479. Many customers responding to the market test believe that an international investor
     would be a suitable buyer, as well as debt collection agencies already operating in
     the market.443
480. In conclusion, the market test revealed that market participants are positive about
     the remedy proposal and its ability to restore competition post-merger. However, a
     few elements emerged during the test required some changes to the proposed
     Commitments, as explained in the following section.
VI.3. Suitability of the proposed commitments to remedy serious doubts in the
area of debt collection and debt purchasing
481. The Commission considers the Commitments proposed by the Notifying Parties as
     suitable to remedy serious doubts raised in the debt collection and the debt
     purchasing markets in Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Norway, and Sweden.
482. The Commitments provide for the removal of the full overlap of the Parties’
     activities in both debt collection and debt purchasing in the five countries
     concerned, i.e. for a clear-cut structural remedy.
483. As explained above, the Divestment Business includes all tangible and intangible
     assets and personnel needed to effectively run the business. In particular the
     Divestment Business is an attractive business with [800-1 000] full time employees,
     five dedicated local management teams (one in each affected country), and [9 000-
     11 000] ongoing client contracts. The Divestment Business achieved a turnover of
     over EUR [amount] million in 2016 through its debt collection activities, and
     includes historic debt portfolios with a total book value of EUR [amount] million.
484. In view of the results of the market test and the importance attached to data and
     models used in relation to national businesses, the Notifying Party proposed to
440 Competitors – Questionnaire R1, Q11-12.
441 Competitors – Questionnaire R1, Q16.
442 Competitors – Questionnaire R1, Q30.
443 Customers – Questionnaire R2, Q14.
                                                  109

     include in the Divestment Business all historical data and models acquired through
     collection on portfolios (either third party or owned) in a country and/or used for the
     purposes of debt collection and/or purchasing in that country.
485. The proposed remedy includes all the business functions and roles currently present
     in Lindorff’s and Intrum Justitia’s national businesses and that are needed for the
     viability of Divestment Business. In view of the results of the market investigation,
     the Notifying Party proposed to include in the Divestment Business also the group
     functions and related personnel necessary for the viability of the Divestment
     Business and which are not performed at the national level.
486. Considering the proposed amendments to the Commitments following the market
     test, the Commission believes that all necessary assets and personnel are included in
     the Divestment Business to ensure the viability and the competitiveness of such
     Business.
487. In relation to key personnel, the Commitments proposed by the Notifying Party
     included the standard non-solicit clause for key personnel for a period of [number]
     months, i.e. the merged entity cannot solicit former employees between the effective
     date (adoption of the decision) and [number] months following the closing of the
     transaction (i.e., following the transfer of the legal title to the Divestment Business
     to the purchaser). Given the results of the market investigation and the paramount
     importance of key personnel retention for the viability of the Divestment Business,
     the Notifying Party agreed to extend the standard non-solicit clause to [number]
     months after closing.
488. The Commission considers that the amendment described above concerning
     personnel are suitable to remedy the concerned emerged during the market test and
     ensure the viability of the Divestment Business.
489. As explained above the Notifying Party proposed to include in the Divestment
     Business a […]-year branding licence for the name “Lindorff” in Finland, Sweden,
     Estonia and Denmark and for the name “Intrum Justitia” in Norway. The market
     investigation results revealed that brand licensing is a feasible option and that the
     period of […] years is sufficient to allow the purchaser to rebrand its businesses.
     Therefore, the Commission agrees with the proposed Commitments.
490. The Commitments include the divestment of Lindorff’s businesses in four countries
     and of Intrum Justitia’s in one country. The Commissions notes that both debt
     collection and debt purchasing markets in the five countries concerned are national
     in scope and that the proposed remedy entirely removes the overlap at the national
     level. The market test did not reveal any significant drawback of the proposed
     remedy set up. Therefore, the Commission considers that Commitments are capable
     to fully remove the Parties’ overlap in the five countries concerned.
491. The Commitments proposed by the Notifying Party included a non-compete clause
     for debt collection contracts with a change of control provision. In order to allow the
     purchaser to secure all possible contracts in order to keep running the business, the
     Commission believes that a non-compete clause in relation to contracts with change
     of control clauses for a period of [number] months after closing is sufficient. In
     view of the results of the market test, the Notifying Party agreed on extending the
     non-compete clause to all contracts (with or without a change of control provision)
     during the period between the effective date (adoption of the decision) and […]. For
     the same purposes the Notifying Party has also added to the Commitments a non-
                                                 110

     solicit-clause related to customers, i.e. the merged entity commits not to solicit
     companies that were customers of the Divestment Business on the effective date,
     during the period between the effective date and […]. The Commission agrees with
     the proposed changes and believes that the final version of the Commitments will
     ensure an effective transfer of assets to the Divestment Business.
492. The Commitments include the standard criteria for a suitable purchaser (contained
     in section D of the Commitments), in particular that the purchaser must have the
     financial resources, proven expertise and incentive to maintain and develop the
     Divestment Businesses as viable and active competitive forces in competition with
     the merged entity and with other competitors. Moreover, the Commitments include
     the provision to sell the Divestment Business to a single purchaser. The
     Commission believes that the criteria for a suitable purchase are adequate and that
     the single buyer solution is the most appropriate option in this case. In particular, the
     creation of a new international player active in a number of Nordic countries will
     allow to replicate a similar competitive pressure to the pre-Transaction situation.
493. In view of the results of the market tests and the need to guarantee the viability and
     competitiveness of the Divestment Business in each of the countries concerned, the
     Notifying Party proposed to strengthen the purchaser’s criteria. The Purchaser will
     have to provide the Commission with the business plans for the Divestment
     Business in all the five countries; the Purchaser can only be approved if the
     Commission is satisfied that such business plans are viable and sufficiently likely to
     succeed, and demonstrate the necessary understanding of and commitment to each
     of the markets. The Commission considers that this requirement will ensure that the
     Divestment Business will effectively compete in each of the five countries and will
     keep exercising the competitive pressure in the long-run.
494. On this basis, the Commission considers the Commitments to be sufficient in scope
     and suitable to eliminate serious doubts as to the compatibility of the Transaction
     with the internal market in relation to CMS, including debt collection, and debt
     purchasing given the purpose of Article 6(2) of the Merger Regulation.
VI.4. Conclusion on the Commitments
495. For the reasons outlined above, the Commission concludes that the Commitments
     entered into by the undertakings concerned are sufficient in scope and suitable to
     eliminate the serious doubts as to the compatibility of the Transaction with the
     internal market in relation to CMS, including debt collection, and debt purchasing in
     the five concerned countries, i.e. Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Norway, and Sweden,
     given the purpose of Article 6(2) of the Merger Regulation.
VII. CONDITIONS AND OBLIGATIONS
496. Pursuant to the first sentence of the second subparagraph of Article 6(2) of the
     Merger Regulation, the Commission may attach to its decision conditions and
     obligations intended to ensure that the undertakings concerned comply with the
     commitments they have entered into vis-à-vis the Commission with a view to
     rendering the concentration compatible with the internal market.
497. The achievement of the measure that gives rise to the structural change of the
     market is a condition, whereas the implementing steps which are necessary to
     achieve this result are generally obligations on the parties. Where a condition is not
     fulfilled, the Commission’s decision declaring the concentration compatible with the
                                                 111

     internal market and the EEA Agreement no longer stands. Where the undertakings
     concerned commit a breach of an obligation, the Commission may revoke the
     clearance decision in accordance with Article 8(6)(b) of the Merger Regulation. The
     undertakings concerned may also be subject to fines and periodic penalty payments
     under Articles 14(2) and 15(1) of the Merger Regulation.
498. In accordance with the basic distinction between conditions and obligations, the
     decision in this case is conditional on full compliance with the requirements set out
     in Section B of the final Commitments (including the Schedules), which constitute
     conditions. The remaining requirements set out in the other Sections of the said
     Commitments are considered to constitute obligations on Nordic Capital.
499. The full text of the final Commitments is annexed to this Decision and forms an
     integral part of this Decision.
VIII. CONCLUSION
500. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation as modified by the Commitments and to declare it compatible with the
     internal market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement, subject to full
     compliance with the conditions in Section B (including Schedules A to F) of the
     Commitments annexed to the Decision and with the obligations contained in the
     other Sections of the said Commitments. This decision is adopted in application of
     Article 6(1)(b) in conjunction with Article 6(2) of the Merger Regulation and
     Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                      For the Commission
                                                      (Signed)
                                                      Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                      Member of the Commission
                                                112

                                       Case M. 8287 – Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia
                                COMMITMENTS TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                   Pursuant to Article 6(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 (the “Merger Regulation”), Nordic
                   Capital Fund VIII (the “Notifying Party”) hereby enters into the following Commitments (the
                   “Commitments”) vis-à-vis the European Commission (the “Commission”) with a view to rendering
                   the acquisition of sole control within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation by the
                   Notifying Party over Intrum Justitia AB (“Intrum Justitia”) (the “Concentration”) compatible with
                   the internal market and the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
                   Through the Concentration, Intrum Justitia will acquire sole control over Lock Topco and subsidiaries
                   (“Lindorff”), by transfer of all its shares from the Notifying Party and certain other minority sellers in
                   exchange for newly issued common shares in Intrum Justitia.
                   This text shall be interpreted in light of the Commission’s decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of the
                   Merger Regulation to declare the Concentration compatible with the internal market and the
                   functioning of the EEA Agreement (the “Decision”), in the general framework of European Union
                   law, in particular in light of the Merger Regulation, and by reference to the Commission Notice on
                   remedies acceptable under Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 and under Commission Regulation
                   (EC) No 802/2004 (the “Remedies Notice”).
                   Section A.       Definitions
                   1. For the purpose of the Commitments, the following terms shall have the following meaning:
                       Affiliated Undertakings: undertakings controlled by the Parties and/or by the ultimate parents of
                       the Parties, whereby the notion of control shall be interpreted pursuant to Article 3 of the Merger
                       Regulation and in light of the Commission Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice under Council
                       Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings (the
                       "Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice").
                       Assets: the assets that contribute to the current operation or are necessary to ensure the viability
                       and competitiveness of the Divestment Business as indicated in Section B, paragraph 5 (a), (b) and
                       (c) and described more in detail in the Schedules.
LEGAL#15241769v1
                       Closing: the transfer of the direct or indirect legal title to the Divestment Business to the
                       Purchaser.
                       Closing Period: the period of [time] from the approval of the Purchaser and the terms of sale by
                       the Commission (adjusted as required for financial services approvals, as applicable).

Confidential Information: any business secrets, know-how, commercial information, or any
other information of a proprietary nature that is not in the public domain.
Conflict of Interest: any conflict of interest that impairs the Trustee's objectivity and
independence in discharging its duties under the Commitments.
Divestment Business: the Divestment Business Finland, Divestment Business Estonia,
Divestment Business Sweden, Divestment Business Denmark, Divestment Business Norway and
Divestment Group Organisation, as defined in Section B and in the Schedules, which the
Notifying Party commits to divest.
Divestiture Trustee: one or more natural or legal person(s) who is/are approved by the
Commission and appointed by the Notifying Party and who has/have received from the Notifying
Party the exclusive Trustee Mandate to sell the Divestment Business to a Purchaser at no
minimum price.
Effective Date: the date of adoption of the Decision.
First Divestiture Period: the period of [time] from the Effective Date.
Historical Debt Portfolios: all debt portfolios currently owned by Lindorff purchased from
customers in Denmark, Estonia, Finland, and Sweden and the debt portfolios currently owned by
Intrum Justitia purchased from customers in Norway.
Hold Separate Manager: the person appointed by the Notifying Party for the Divestment
Business to manage the day-to-day business under the supervision of the Monitoring Trustee.
Intrum Justitia: Intrum Justitia AB (publ) a limited liability company incorporated under the
laws of Sweden, registered under number 556607-7581.
Key Personnel: all personnel necessary to maintain the viability and competitiveness of the
Divestment Business, as listed in the Schedules, including the Hold Separate Manager.
Lindorff: Lock Topco AS (and subsidiaries), incorporated under the laws of Norway and
registered under number 913 852.
Monitoring Trustee: one or more natural or legal person(s) who is/are approved by the
Commission and appointed by the Notifying Party, and who has/have the duty to monitor the
Notifying Party’s compliance with the conditions and obligations attached to the Decision.
Notifying Party: Nordic Capital Fund VIII, a limited liability company incorporated under the
laws of Jersey, having its registered office at 26 Esplanade, St Helier, Jersey JE2 3QA, Channel
Islands, acting in its capacity as General Partner to Nordic Capital VIII Alpha L.P. and Nordic
Capital VIII Beta L.P.
Parties: the Notifying Party, Intrum Justitia and Lindorff.
                                                    2

    Personnel: all staff currently employed by the Divestment Business including staff seconded to
    the Divestment Business, shared personnel as well as additional personnel listed in the Schedules.
    Purchaser: the entity approved by the Commission as acquirer of the Divestment Business in
    accordance with the criteria set out in Section D.
    Purchaser Criteria: the criteria laid down in paragraph 17 of these Commitments that the
    Purchaser must fulfil in order to be approved by the Commission.
    Schedules: the schedules to these Commitments describing in more detail the Divestment
    Business (namely Schedules A to F, covering five different countries and the Divestment Group
    Organisation).
    Trustee(s): the Monitoring Trustee and/or the Divestiture Trustee as the case may be.
    Trustee Divestiture Period: the period of [time] from the end of the First Divestiture Period.
Section B.       The commitment to divest and the Divestment Business
    Commitment to divest
2. In order to maintain effective competition, the Notifying Party commits to divest, or procure the
    divestiture of the Divestment Business by the end of the Trustee Divestiture Period as a going
    concern to a purchaser and on terms of sale approved by the Commission in accordance with the
    procedure described in paragraph 18 of these Commitments. To carry out the divestiture, the
    Notifying Party commits to find a purchaser and to enter into a final binding sale and purchase
    agreement for the sale of the Divestment Business within the First Divestiture Period. If the
    Notifying Party has not entered into such an agreement at the end of the First Divestiture Period,
    the Notifying Party shall grant the Divestiture Trustee an exclusive mandate to sell the Divestment
    Business in accordance with the procedure described in paragraph 30 in the Trustee Divestiture
    Period.
3. The Notifying Party shall be deemed to have complied with this commitment if:
       (a)      by the end of the Trustee Divestiture Period, the Notifying Party or the Divestiture
                Trustee has entered into a final binding sale and purchase agreement and the
                Commission approves the proposed purchaser and the terms of sale as being consistent
                with the Commitments in accordance with the procedure described in paragraph 18;
                and
       (b)      the Closing of the sale of the Divestment Business to the Purchaser takes place within
                the Closing Period.
4. In order to maintain the structural effect of the Commitments, the Notifying Party shall, for a
    period of 10 years after Closing, not acquire, whether directly or indirectly, the possibility of
    exercising influence (as defined in paragraph 43 of the Remedies Notice, footnote 3) over the
                                                       3

    whole or part of the Divestment Business, unless, following the submission of a reasoned request
    from the Notifying Party showing good cause and accompanied by a report from the Monitoring
    Trustee (as provided in paragraph 44 of these Commitments), the Commission finds that the
    structure of the market has changed to such an extent that the absence of influence over the
    Divestment Business is no longer necessary to render the proposed Concentration compatible with
    the internal market.
Structure and definition of the Divestment Business
5. The Divestment Business consists of the following corporate entities active in debt collection,
    other credit management services and debt purchasing:
        i.   Lindorff Oy, Lindorff’s entire business in Finland (excluding Latvian and Lithuanian
             branches) (“Divestment Business Finland”, see Schedule A);
       ii.   Lindorff Esti AS, Lindorff’s entire business in Estonia (“Divestment Business Estonia”, see
             Schedule B);
      iii.   Lindorff Sverige AB, Lindorff Payment Services AB and Lindorff Payment Services Holding
             AB, Lindorff’s entire business in Sweden (“Divestment Business Sweden”, see Schedule
             C);
      iv.    Lindorff Danmark A/S and Lindorff A/S, Lindorff’s entire business in Denmark
             (“Divestment Business Denmark”, see Schedule D);
       v.    Intrum Justitia AS (including subsidiary Intrum Justitia Finans AS), Intrum Justitia’s entire
             business in Norway (“Divestment Business Norway”, see Schedule E).
    In addition, the Divestment Business includes a Divestment Group Organisation, consisting of
    senior, experienced Key Personnel, who will work exclusively at the Divestment Business group
    level, ensuring effective group management and group support functions for all the entities listed
    above.
    The legal and functional structure of the Divestment Business as operated to date is described in
    the Schedules. The Divestment Business, described in more detail in the Schedules, includes all
    assets and staff that contribute to the current operation or are necessary to ensure the viability and
    competitiveness of the Divestment Business, in particular:
        (a)      all tangible and intangible assets (including all available data and models related to the
                 Divestment Business’ debt collection and debt purchasing activities, as well as
                 intellectual property rights, in particular a [...]-year branding licence for “Lindorff” for
                 the Divestment Business Finland, Divestment Business Sweden, Divestment Business
                 Denmark and Divestment Business Estonia, and “Intrum Justitia” for the Divestment
                 Business Norway);
        (b)      all licences, permits and authorisations issued by any governmental organisation for
                 the benefit of the Divestment Business;
                                                          4

(c) all contracts, leases, commitments and customer orders of the Divestment Business;
    all customer, credit and other records of the Divestment Business;
(d) the Personnel; and
(e) a best efforts obligation to secure the transfer to the Purchaser of debt collection
    customer contracts containing a change of control provision, failing which the
    Notifying Party agrees not to enter into new agreements with such customers for a
    period of [...] after Closing; except agreements where a customer’s in-house business
    unit with a collection activity is acquired through a structural transaction, and where it
    can be established to the satisfaction of the Monitoring Trustee that the collection
    activities covered by the transaction and those handled under the customer contract
    with a change of control provision respectively are distinct so that the Monitoring
    Trustee is comfortable that the transaction does not transfer to the Notifying Party any
    of the activity performed under the contract in question.
    For customers which on the Effective Date used both Lindorff and Intrum Justitia as
    debt collection suppliers, the Notifying Party can continue to provide services under
    existing contracts and can prolong/renew such contracts, without increasing their
    scope in terms of volume and categories of debt cases covered by the contract.
    As regards contracts with an annual income value of over EUR [...] (“Material
    Contracts”), approximately the following volumes of contracts are affected by this
    provision:
    Divestment              No of Material        Approximate            Value of Material
    Business                Contracts             total number of        Contracts
                            containing a          debt collection        containing a
                            change of control     contracts              change of control
                            provision                                    provision
    Finland                 [20-30]               [6 000-8 000]          [10-20] MEUR
    Estonia                 [0-10]                [30-50]                [0-10] MEUR
    Sweden                  [0-10]                [5 000-7 000]          [0-10] MEUR
    Denmark                 [0-10]                [150-300]              [0-10] MEUR
    Norway                  [0-10]                [3 000-5 000]          [0-10] MEUR
    It is noted that the vast majority of customer contracts do not contain change of
    control provisions. It should be noted that especially in […] and […], a large
    proportion of the third party debt collection contracts are contracts with [...]. Almost
    all of them are based on standard contract terms, which do not include change of
    control clauses.
(f) a best efforts obligation to secure the approval of the entities from which the Historical
    Debt Portfolios forming part of the Divestment Business were purchased by the
    Parties (the “Originators”) in order to allow for their transfer to the Purchaser, where
    required for change of ownership, failing which the Parties agree to enter into an
                                            5

                agreement with the Purchaser for debt collection servicing of the Historical Debt
                Portfolio in question. The Parties also commit to a best efforts obligation to secure
                consent from the Originators where it is required for the transfer of the debt collection
                servicing.
                It is noted that the overwhelming majority of Historical Debt Portfolios are unaffected
                by this provision. The majority of portfolio contracts for smaller portfolios do not
                contain any change of control clauses. Contracts for larger portfolios, especially
                portfolios sold by the larger banks, often contain change of control clauses that
                regulate the resale of the portfolio as such, but not a change of control of the company
                holding the portfolio. However, some banks, e.g. [...], do include broader change of
                control clauses in their portfolio contracts. It is also more common for synthetic
                ownership portfolios in Denmark. Of the two largest portfolios included in the
                Divestment Business - [...] in Sweden, only the transfer of [...] will require consent
                (the change of control provision related to [...] has now expired after three years). It is
                estimated that the [...] portfolio would generate EUR [0-10] million in revenue this
                year. The total value of Historical Debt Portfolios affected by change of control
                clauses is approximately [0-10] million in Denmark and [40-50] million in Sweden.
                There are no affected portfolios in the other country businesses.
       (g)      a best efforts obligation to secure approval from [...], the third party service provider
                of [...] to Lindorff, for the extension of the existing arrangement to cover the
                Divestment Business, where required, for a transitional period of at least [...] months
                unless otherwise agreed with the Purchaser.
6. In addition, the Divestment Business includes the benefit, for a transitional period of up to [...]
    after Closing and on terms and conditions equivalent to those at present afforded to the
    Divestment Business, of all current arrangements under which the Parties or its Affiliated
    Undertakings supply products or services to the Divestment Business, as detailed in the Schedules.
    This includes a [...]-year branding licence for “Lindorff” for the Divestment Business Finland,
    Divestment Business Sweden, Divestment Business Denmark and Divestment Business Estonia,
    and “Intrum Justitia” for the Divestment Business Norway. Strict firewall procedures will be
    adopted so as to ensure that any competitively sensitive information related to, or arising from,
    such transitional arrangements will not be shared with, or passed on to, anyone outside the
    relevant division providing the service to the Divestment Business.
7. The Notifying Party shall sell or procure the sale of the shares and/or assets in the Divestment
    Business to one single suitable Purchaser.
 Section C.       Related commitments
    Preservation of viability, marketability and competitiveness
8. From the Effective Date until Closing, the Notifying Party shall preserve or procure the
    preservation of the economic viability, marketability and competitiveness of the Divestment
    Business, in accordance with good business practice, and shall minimise as far as possible any risk
                                                         6

   of loss of competitive potential of the Divestment Business. In particular the Notifying Party
   undertakes:
     (a)       not to carry out any action that might have a significant adverse impact on the value,
               management or competitiveness of the Divestment Business or that might alter the
               nature and scope of activity, or the industrial or commercial strategy or the investment
               policy of the Divestment Business;
     (b)       to make available, or procure to make available, sufficient resources for the
               development of the Divestment Business, on the basis and continuation of the existing
               business plans;
     (c)       to take all reasonable steps, or procure that all reasonable steps are being taken,
               including appropriate incentive schemes (based on industry practice), to encourage all
               Key Personnel to remain with the Divestment Business, and not to solicit or move any
               Personnel to the Parties’ remaining business. Where, nevertheless, individual
               members of the Key Personnel exceptionally leave the Divestment Business, the
               Notifying Party shall provide a reasoned proposal to replace the person or persons
               concerned to the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee. The Notifying Party must
               be able to demonstrate to the Commission that the replacement is well suited to carry
               out the functions exercised by those individual members of the Key Personnel. The
               replacement shall take place under the supervision of the Monitoring Trustee, who
               shall report to the Commission;
     (d)       not to enter into any contract – or prior agreement, formal or informal, providing for
               such a contract to be concluded after Closing – with any companies that are customers
               of the Divestment Business on the Effective Date, and not to solicit companies that
               were customers of the Divestment Business on the Effective Date; except where in the
               context of a structured tendering process of a customer Lindorff or Intrum Justitia, as
               the case may be, has submitted a binding bid before the Effective Date and as a result
               of that bid enters into a contract with the customer after the Effective Date and the
               Monitoring Trustee is satisfied that by the Effective Date this process was at a
               sufficiently advanced stage for it to be reasonable to allow the merged entity to enter
               into that contract; for customers which on the Effective Date used both Lindorff and
               Intrum Justitia as debt collection suppliers, the Notifying Party can continue to
               provide services under existing contracts and can prolong/renew such contracts,
               without increasing their scope in terms of volume and categories of debt cases covered
               by the contract.
   Hold-separate obligations
9. The Notifying Party commits, from the Effective Date until Closing, to keep the Divestment
   Business separate from the business(es) it is retaining and to ensure that unless explicitly
   permitted under these Commitments: (i) management and staff of the business(es) retained by the
   Parties have no involvement in the Divestment Business; (ii) the Key Personnel and Personnel of
   the Divestment Business have no involvement in any business retained by the Notifying Party and
   do not report to any individual outside the Divestment Business.
                                                      7

10. Until Closing, the Notifying Party shall assist the Monitoring Trustee in ensuring that the
    Divestment Business is managed as a distinct and saleable entity separate from the business(es)
    which the Notifying Party is retaining. Immediately after the adoption of the Decision, the
    Notifying Party shall appoint a Hold Separate Manager. The Hold Separate Manager, who shall be
    part of the Key Personnel, shall manage the Divestment Business independently and in the best
    interest of the business with a view to ensuring its continued economic viability, marketability and
    competitiveness and its independence from the businesses retained by the Notifying Party. The
    Hold Separate Manager shall closely cooperate with and report to the Monitoring Trustee and, if
    applicable, the Divestiture Trustee. Any replacement of the Hold Separate Manager shall be
    subject to the procedure laid down in paragraph 8(c) of these Commitments. The Commission
    may, after having heard the Notifying Party, require the Notifying Party to replace the Hold
    Separate Manager.
11. To ensure that the Divestment Business is held and managed as a separate entity the Monitoring
    Trustee shall exercise the Parties’ direct or indirect rights as shareholder in the legal entity or
    entities that constitute the Divestment Business (except for its rights in respect of dividends that
    are due before Closing), with the aim of acting in the best interest of the business, which shall be
    determined on a stand-alone basis, as an independent financial investor, and with a view to
    fulfilling the Notifying Party’s obligations under the Commitments. Furthermore, the Monitoring
    Trustee shall have the power to replace members of the supervisory board or non-executive
    directors of the board of directors of the Divestment Business, who have been appointed on behalf
    of the Notifying Party. Upon request of the Monitoring Trustee, the Notifying Party shall cause its
    representatives to resign as members of the boards or shall cause such members of the boards to
    resign.
    Ring-fencing
12. The Notifying Party shall implement, or procure to implement, all necessary measures to ensure
    that the Parties do not, after the Effective Date, obtain any Confidential Information relating to the
    Divestment Business and that any such Confidential Information obtained by the Parties before the
    Effective Date will be eliminated and not be used by the Parties. This includes measures vis-à-vis
    the Notifying Party’s appointees on the supervisory board and/or board of directors of the
    Divestment Business. In particular, the participation of the Divestment Business in any central
    information technology network shall be severed to the extent possible, without compromising the
    viability of the Divestment Business. The Notifying Party may obtain or keep information relating
    to the Divestment Business which is reasonably necessary for the divestiture of the Divestment
    Business or the disclosure of which to the Notifying Party is required by law.
    Non-solicitation clause
13. The Parties undertake, subject to customary limitations, not to solicit, and to procure that
    Affiliated Undertakings do not solicit,
       (a)       for a period of [...] after Closing, the Key Personnel, sales and customer relations
                 employees, account managers, debt purchasing analysts and other important
                 Personnel. A list of Personnel covered by this undertaking shall be agreed with the
                 Monitoring Trustee, with the view of preserving the viability and competitiveness of
                 the Divestment Business.
                                                         8

       (b)       for a period of [...] after Closing, companies that were customers of the Divestment
                 Business on the Effective Date.
     The commitment under (a) applies to all personnel of the Parties' retained business, including the
     Personnel that the Parties may recruit from the Divestment Business during [...] after Closing.
     The Monitoring Trustee will monitor compliance with these commitments for the respective
     periods mentioned above.
     Within one month from the Effective Date the Parties will provide the Monitoring Trustee with
     detailed information on all the measures they envisage to put in place to comply with the
     commitments in this point 13. The Monitoring Trustee will assess and approve such measures and
     may ask the Parties to modify and strengthen them if need be to ensure effective implementation
     of the commitments.
     The Parties will provide the Monitoring Trustee with all necessary and detailed information, in
     particular prior to the possible recruitment of Personnel and the signing of contracts with
     companies that were customers of the Divested Business at the Effective Date, so as to enable the
     Monitoring Trustee to assess compliance with the commitments.
    Due diligence
14. In order to enable potential purchasers to carry out a reasonable due diligence of the Divestment
    Business, the Notifying Party shall, subject to customary confidentiality assurances and dependent
    on the stage of the divestiture process:
       (a)        provide to potential purchasers sufficient information as regards the Divestment
                  Business;
       (b)        provide to potential purchasers sufficient information relating to the Personnel and
                  allow them reasonable access to the Personnel.
    Reporting
15. The Notifying Party shall submit written reports in English on potential purchasers of the
    Divestment Business and developments in the negotiations with such potential purchasers to the
    Commission and the Monitoring Trustee no later than 10 days after the end of every month
    following the Effective Date (or otherwise at the Commission’s request). The Notifying Party
    shall submit a list of all potential purchasers having expressed interest in acquiring the Divestment
    Business to the Commission at each and every stage of the divestiture process, as well as a copy of
    all the offers made by potential purchasers within five days of their receipt.
16. The Notifying Party shall inform the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee on the preparation
    of the data room documentation and the due diligence procedure and shall submit a copy of any
    information memorandum to the Commission and the Monitoring Trustee before sending the
    memorandum out to potential purchasers.
                                                         9

Section D.        The Purchaser
17. In order to be approved by the Commission, the Purchaser must fulfil the following criteria:
      (a)        The Purchaser shall be independent of and unconnected to the Parties and their
                 Affiliated Undertakings (this being assessed having regard to the situation following
                 the divestiture);
      (b)        The Purchaser shall have the financial resources, proven expertise and incentive to
                 maintain and develop the Divestment Business as a viable and active competitive
                 force in competition with the Parties and other competitors;
      (c)        The acquisition of the Divestment Business by the Purchaser must neither be likely to
                 create, in light of the information available to the Commission, prima facie
                 competition concerns nor give rise to a risk that the implementation of the
                 Commitments will be delayed. In particular, the Purchaser must reasonably be
                 expected to obtain all necessary approvals from the relevant regulatory authorities for
                 the acquisition of the Divestment Business.
      (d)        The Purchaser must provide detailed business plans for the future of the Divestment
                 Business in each of the five countries, for both debt purchasing and debt collection.
                 The Purchaser can only be approved if the Commission is satisfied that these business
                 plans are viable and sufficiently likely to succeed, and demonstrate the necessary
                 understanding of and commitment to each of the markets.
18. The final binding sale and purchase agreement (as well as ancillary agreements) relating to the
    divestment of the Divestment Business shall be conditional on the Commission’s approval. When
    the Notifying Party has reached an agreement with a purchaser, it shall submit a fully documented
    and reasoned proposal, including a copy of the final agreement(s), within one week to the
    Commission and the Monitoring Trustee. The Notifying Party must be able to demonstrate to the
    Commission that the purchaser fulfils the Purchaser Criteria and that the Divestment Business is
    being sold in a manner consistent with the Commission's Decision and the Commitments. For the
    approval, the Commission shall verify that the purchaser fulfils the Purchaser Criteria and that the
    Divestment Business is being sold in a manner consistent with the Commitments including their
    objective to bring about a lasting structural change in the market. The Commission may approve
    the sale of the Divestment Business without one or more Assets or parts of the Personnel, or by
    substituting one or more Assets or parts of the Personnel with one or more different assets or
    different personnel, if this does not affect the viability and competitiveness of the Divestment
    Business after the sale, taking account of the proposed purchaser.
                                                       10

Section E.        Trustee
I.      Appointment procedure
19. The Notifying Party shall appoint a Monitoring Trustee to carry out the functions specified in
    these Commitments for a Monitoring Trustee. The Notifying Party commits not to close the
    Concentration before the appointment of a Monitoring Trustee.
20. If the Notifying Party has not entered into a binding sale and purchase agreement regarding the
    Divestment Business one month before the end of the First Divestiture Period or if the
    Commission has rejected a purchaser proposed by the Notifying Party at that time or thereafter,
    the Notifying Party shall appoint a Divestiture Trustee. The appointment of the Divestiture Trustee
    shall take effect upon the commencement of the Trustee Divestiture Period.
21. The Trustee shall:
        i.   at the time of appointment, be independent of the Parties their Affiliated Undertakings;
       ii.   possess the necessary qualifications to carry out its mandate, for example have sufficient
             relevant experience as an investment banker or consultant or auditor; and
      iii.   neither have nor become exposed to a Conflict of Interest.
22. The Trustee shall be remunerated by the Notifying Party in a way that does not impede the
    independent and effective fulfilment of its mandate. In particular, where the remuneration package
    of a Divestiture Trustee includes a success premium linked to the final sale value of the
    Divestment Business, such success premium may only be earned if the divestiture takes place
    within the Trustee Divestiture Period.
        Proposal by the Notifying Party
23. No later than two weeks after the Effective Date, the Notifying Party shall submit the name or
    names of one or more natural or legal persons whom the Notifying Party proposes to appoint as
    the Monitoring Trustee to the Commission for approval. No later than one month before the end of
    the First Divestiture Period or on request by the Commission, the Notifying Party shall submit a
    list of one or more persons whom the Notifying Party proposes to appoint as Divestiture Trustee to
    the Commission for approval. The proposal shall contain sufficient information for the
    Commission to verify that the person or persons proposed as Trustee fulfil the requirements set out
    in paragraph 21 and shall include:
       (a)       the full terms of the proposed mandate, which shall include all provisions necessary to
                 enable the Trustee to fulfil its duties under these Commitments;
       (b)       the outline of a work plan which describes how the Trustee intends to carry out its
                 assigned tasks;
                                                          11

       (c)        an indication whether the proposed Trustee is to act as both Monitoring Trustee and
                  Divestiture Trustee or whether different trustees are proposed for the two functions.
        Approval or rejection by the Commission
24. The Commission shall have the discretion to approve or reject the proposed Trustee(s) and to
    approve the proposed mandate subject to any modifications it deems necessary for the Trustee to
    fulfil its obligations. If only one name is approved, the Notifying Party shall appoint or cause to be
    appointed the person or persons concerned as Trustee, in accordance with the mandate approved
    by the Commission. If more than one name is approved, the Notifying Party shall be free to
    choose the Trustee to be appointed from among the names approved. The Trustee shall be
    appointed within one week of the Commission’s approval, in accordance with the mandate
    approved by the Commission.
        New proposal by the Notifying Party
25. If all the proposed Trustees are rejected, the Notifying Party shall submit the names of at least two
    more natural or legal persons within one week of being informed of the rejection, in accordance
    with paragraphs 19 and 24 of these Commitments.
        Trustee nominated by the Commission
26. If all further proposed Trustees are rejected by the Commission, the Commission shall nominate a
    Trustee, whom the Notifying Party shall appoint, or cause to be appointed, in accordance with a
    trustee mandate approved by the Commission.
II.     Functions of the Trustee
27. The Trustee shall assume its specified duties and obligations in order to ensure compliance with
    the Commitments. The Commission may, on its own initiative or at the request of the Trustee or
    the Notifying Party, give any orders or instructions to the Trustee in order to ensure compliance
    with the conditions and obligations attached to the Decision.
        Duties and obligations of the Monitoring Trustee
28. The Monitoring Trustee shall:
    (i)       propose in its first report to the Commission a detailed work plan describing how it
              intends to monitor compliance with the obligations and conditions attached to the
              Decision.
    (ii)      oversee, in close co-operation with the Hold Separate Manager, the on-going management
              of the Divestment Business with a view to ensuring its continued economic viability,
              marketability and competitiveness and monitor compliance by the Notifying Party with
              the conditions and obligations attached to the Decision. To that end the Monitoring
              Trustee shall:
                                                        12

         (a) monitor the preservation of the economic viability, marketability and
             competitiveness of the Divestment Business, and the keeping separate of the
             Divestment Business from the business retained by the Parties, in accordance with
             paragraphs 8 and 9 of these Commitments;
         (b) supervise the management of the Divestment Business as a distinct and saleable
             entity, in accordance with paragraph 10 of these Commitments;
         (c) with respect to Confidential Information:
               <U+F02D>   determine all necessary measures to ensure that the Parties do not after the
                   Effective Date obtain any Confidential Information relating to the
                   Divestment Business,
               <U+F02D>   in particular strive for the severing of the Divestment Business’ participation
                   in a central information technology network to the extent possible, without
                   compromising the viability of the Divestment Business,
               <U+F02D>   make sure that any Confidential Information relating to the Divestment
                   Business obtained by the Parties before the Effective Date is eliminated and
                   will not be used by the Parties and
               <U+F02D>   decide whether such information may be disclosed to or kept by the
                   Notifying Party as the disclosure is reasonably necessary to allow the
                   Notifying Party to carry out the divestiture or as the disclosure is required by
                   law;
         (d) monitor the splitting of assets and the allocation of Personnel between the
             Divestment Business and the Parties or Affiliated Undertakings;
(iii) oversee the determination of the compensation to be paid by the Purchaser to the
      Notifying Party for the transitional services referred to in paragraph 6 and detailed in the
      Schedules to be provided at terms and conditions equivalent to those at present afforded to
      the Divestment Business;
(iv)  propose to the Notifying Party such measures as the Monitoring Trustee considers
      necessary to ensure the Notifying Party’s compliance with the conditions and obligations
      attached to the Decision, in particular the maintenance of the full economic viability,
      marketability or competitiveness of the Divestment Business, the holding separate of the
      Divestment Business and the non-disclosure of competitively sensitive information;
(v)   review and assess potential purchasers as well as the progress of the divestiture process
      and verify that, dependent on the stage of the divestiture process:
         (a) potential purchasers receive sufficient and correct information relating to the
             Divestment Business and the Personnel in particular by reviewing, if available, the
                                                  13

                     data room documentation, the information memorandum and the due diligence
                     process, and
               (b) potential purchasers are granted reasonable access to the Personnel;
    (vi)     act as a contact point for any requests by third parties, in particular potential purchasers, in
             relation to the Commitments;
    (vii)    provide to the Commission, sending the Notifying Party a non-confidential copy at the
             same time, a written report within 15 days after the end of every month that shall cover the
             operation and management of the Divestment Business as well as the splitting of assets
             and the allocation of Personnel so that the Commission can assess whether the business is
             held in a manner consistent with the Commitments and the progress of the divestiture
             process as well as potential purchasers;
    (viii)   promptly report in writing to the Commission, sending the Notifying Party a non-
             confidential copy at the same time, if it concludes on reasonable grounds that the
             Notifying Party is failing to comply with these Commitments;
    (ix)     within one week after receipt of the documented proposal referred to in paragraph 18 of
             these Commitments, submit to the Commission, sending the Notifying Party a non-
             confidential copy at the same time, a reasoned opinion as to the suitability and
             independence of the proposed purchaser and the viability of the Divestment Business after
             the sale and as to whether the Divestment Business is sold in a manner consistent with the
             conditions and obligations attached to the Decision, in particular, if relevant, whether the
             sale of the Divestment Business without one or more Assets or not all of the Personnel
             affects the viability of the Divestment Business after the sale, taking account of the
             proposed purchaser;
    (x)      assume the other functions assigned to the Monitoring Trustee under the conditions and
             obligations attached to the Decision.
29. If the Monitoring and Divestiture Trustee are not the same legal or natural persons, the Monitoring
    Trustee and the Divestiture Trustee shall cooperate closely with each other during and for the
    purpose of the preparation of the Trustee Divestiture Period in order to facilitate each other's tasks.
        Duties and obligations of the Divestiture Trustee
30. Within the Trustee Divestiture Period, the Divestiture Trustee shall sell at no minimum price the
    Divestment Business to a purchaser, provided that the Commission has approved both the
    purchaser and the final binding sale and purchase agreement (and ancillary agreements) as in line
    with the Commission's Decision and the Commitments in accordance with paragraphs 17 and 18
    of these Commitments. The Divestiture Trustee shall include in the sale and purchase agreement
    (as well as in any ancillary agreements) such terms and conditions as it considers appropriate for
    an expedient sale in the Trustee Divestiture Period. In particular, the Divestiture Trustee may
    include in the sale and purchase agreement such customary representations and warranties and
    indemnities as are reasonably required to effect the sale. The Divestiture Trustee shall protect the
                                                        14

     legitimate financial interests of the Notifying Party, subject to the Notifying Party’s unconditional
     obligation to divest at no minimum price in the Trustee Divestiture Period.
31. In the Trustee Divestiture Period (or otherwise at the Commission’s request), the Divestiture
     Trustee shall provide the Commission with a comprehensive monthly report written in English on
     the progress of the divestiture process. Such reports shall be submitted within 15 days after the end
     of every month with a simultaneous copy to the Monitoring Trustee and a non-confidential copy to
     the Notifying Party.
III.     Duties and obligations of the Parties
32. The Notifying Party shall provide and shall cause its advisors to provide the Trustee with all such
     co-operation, assistance and information as the Trustee may reasonably require to perform its
     tasks. The Trustee shall have full and complete access to any of the Parties’ or the Divestment
     Business’ books, records, documents, management or other personnel, facilities, sites and
     technical information necessary for fulfilling its duties under the Commitments and the Notifying
     Party and the Divestment Business shall provide the Trustee upon request with copies of any
     document. The Parties and the Divestment Business shall make available to the Trustee one or
     more offices on their premises and shall be available for meetings in order to provide the Trustee
     with all information necessary for the performance of its tasks.
33. The Parties shall provide the Monitoring Trustee with all managerial and administrative support
     that it may reasonably request on behalf of the management of the Divestment Business. This shall
     include all administrative support functions relating to the Divestment Business which are
     currently carried out at headquarters level. The Notifying Party shall provide and shall cause its
     advisors to provide the Monitoring Trustee, on request, with the information submitted to potential
     purchasers, in particular give the Monitoring Trustee access to the data room documentation and
     all other information granted to potential purchasers in the due diligence procedure. The Notifying
     Party shall inform the Monitoring Trustee on possible purchasers, submit lists of potential
     purchasers at each stage of the selection process, including the offers made by potential purchasers
     at those stages, and keep the Monitoring Trustee informed of all developments in the divestiture
     process.
34. The Notifying Party shall grant or procure Affiliated Undertakings to grant comprehensive powers
     of attorney, duly executed, to the Divestiture Trustee to effect the sale (including ancillary
     agreements), the Closing and all actions and declarations which the Divestiture Trustee considers
     necessary or appropriate to achieve the sale and the Closing, including the appointment of advisors
     to assist with the sale process. Upon request of the Divestiture Trustee, the Notifying Party shall
     cause the documents required for effecting the sale and the Closing to be duly executed.
35. The Notifying Party shall indemnify the Trustee and its employees and agents (each an
     “Indemnified Party”) and hold each Indemnified Party harmless against, and hereby agrees that
     an Indemnified Party shall have no liability to the Notifying Party for, any liabilities arising out of
     the performance of the Trustee’s duties under the Commitments, except to the extent that such
     liabilities result from the wilful default, recklessness, gross negligence or bad faith of the Trustee,
     its employees, agents or advisors.
                                                          15

36. At the expense of the Notifying Party, the Trustee may appoint advisors (in particular for
    corporate finance or legal advice), subject to the Notifying Party’s approval (this approval not to
    be unreasonably withheld or delayed) if the Trustee considers the appointment of such advisors
    necessary or appropriate for the performance of its duties and obligations under the Mandate,
    provided that any fees and other expenses incurred by the Trustee are reasonable. Should the
    Notifying Party refuse to approve the advisors proposed by the Trustee the Commission may
    approve the appointment of such advisors instead, after having heard the Notifying Party. Only the
    Trustee shall be entitled to issue instructions to the advisors. Paragraph 35 of these Commitments
    shall apply mutatis mutandis. In the Trustee Divestiture Period, the Divestiture Trustee may use
    advisors who served the Notifying Party during the Divestiture Period if the Divestiture Trustee
    considers this in the best interest of an expedient sale.
37. The Notifying Party agrees that the Commission may share Confidential Information proprietary
    to the Notifying Party with the Trustee. The Trustee shall not disclose such information and the
    principles contained in Article 17 (1) and (2) of the Merger Regulation apply mutatis mutandis.
38. The Notifying Party agrees that the contact details of the Monitoring Trustee are published on the
    website of the Commission's Directorate-General for Competition and they shall inform interested
    third parties, in particular any potential purchasers, of the identity and the tasks of the Monitoring
    Trustee.
39. For a period of 10 years from the Effective Date the Commission may request all information
    from the Parties that is reasonably necessary to monitor the effective implementation of these
    Commitments.
IV.     Replacement, discharge and reappointment of the Trustee
40. If the Trustee ceases to perform its functions under the Commitments or for any other good cause,
    including the exposure of the Trustee to a Conflict of Interest:
    (a)         the Commission may, after hearing the Trustee and the Notifying Party, require the
                Notifying Party to replace the Trustee; or
    (b)         the Notifying Party may, with the prior approval of the Commission, replace the
                Trustee.
41. If the Trustee is removed according to paragraph 40 of these Commitments, the Trustee may be
    required to continue in its function until a new Trustee is in place to whom the Trustee has
    effected a full hand over of all relevant information. The new Trustee shall be appointed in
    accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraphs 19-26 of these Commitments.
42. Unless removed according to paragraph 40 of these Commitments, the Trustee shall cease to act as
    Trustee only after the Commission has discharged it from its duties after all the Commitments
    with which the Trustee has been entrusted have been implemented. However, the Commission
    may at any time require the reappointment of the Monitoring Trustee if it subsequently appears
    that the relevant remedies might not have been fully and properly implemented.
                                                        16

Section F.        The review clause
43. The Commission may extend the time periods foreseen in the Commitments in response to a
    request from the Notifying Party or, in appropriate cases, on its own initiative. Where the
    Notifying Party requests an extension of a time period, it shall submit a reasoned request to the
    Commission no later than one month before the expiry of that period, showing good cause. This
    request shall be accompanied by a report from the Monitoring Trustee, who shall, at the same time
    send a non-confidential copy of the report to the Notifying Party. Only in exceptional
    circumstances shall the Notifying Party be entitled to request an extension within the last month of
    any period.
44. The Commission may further, in response to a reasoned request from the Notifying Party showing
    good cause waive, modify or substitute, in exceptional circumstances, one or more of the
    undertakings in these Commitments. This request shall be accompanied by a report from the
    Monitoring Trustee, who shall, at the same time send a non-confidential copy of the report to the
    Notifying Party. The request shall not have the effect of suspending the application of the
    undertaking and, in particular, of suspending the expiry of any time period in which the
    undertaking has to be complied with.
Section G.        Entry into force
45. The Commitments shall take effect upon the date of adoption of the Decision.
                                                      17

                                            Schedule A - Finland
                   1.   The Divestment Business as operated to date has the following legal and
                        functional structure:
                        The Divestment Business in Finland consists of Lindorff Oy and its wholly-owned
                        subsidiary Lindorff Invest Oy, which constitutes the entirety of Lindorff’s debt
                        collection, other credit management services (namely payments and the invoice and
                        information service), and debt purchasing activities in Finland (the “Divestment
                        Business Finland”). The proposed commitments will remove the entire overlap
                        between Lindorff and Intrum Justitia in debt collection and debt purchasing in
                        Finland.
                        The debt collection business functions by receiving payment for collecting on:
                        (i)    debt owned by third parties; and
                        (ii)   in-house servicing of Historical Debt Portfolios owned by Lindorff Invest Oy,
                               a subsidiary of Lindorff Oy.
                        The debt collection activities provided range from sending reminders on behalf of
                        clients, to formal debt collection procedures (including legal action). The IT
                        systems, including any models, tools or other systems required for debt collection
                        are part of the Divestment Business or offered as a transitional service (see 2(a) and
                        (h) below). The Divestment Business Finland includes the entire credit management
                        services, including payments, business of Lindorff in Finland.
                        The debt purchasing business involves a debt purchasing team with analytical
                        capabilities for evaluating debt portfolios available for sale on the market,
                        specifically providing origination services (i.e. contacts with sellers), valuation and
                        pricing of the portfolios and ongoing, active management of the portfolios (e.g.
                        determination of collection strategy) post-acquisition.         The Historical Debt
                        Portfolios owned by Lindorff Invest Oy also form part of the Divestment Business
                        Finland.
                        The chart below illustrates the legal organisational structure of the Divestment
                        Business Finland, including the equivalent business in Estonia (Lindorff Esti AS)
                        which is part of the same corporate group (see Schedule B for more detail on
                        Estonia):
LEGAL#15241779v1




                                   5(167)
   Development &
     Digitalization
     Director Debt
                             [...]          [...]     Helsinki      2013
       Purchase
    Director Clients         [...]          [...]      Turku        2007
   Client sales and marketing (outside management team)
    Sales Manager            [...]          [...]      Turku        2014
     Key Account
                             [...]          [...]      Turku        2008
       Manager
   Sales and Digital         [...]          [...]      Turku        2014
       Marketing
       Specialist
     Key Account
                             [...]          [...]      Turku        2012
       Manager
        Account              [...]          [...]     Helsinki      2016
       Executive
    Sales Manager            [...]          [...]      Turku        2012
     Key Account             [...]          [...]    Tampere        1987
       Manager
       Manager,
      Channels &
                             [...]          [...]      Turku        2008
         Sales
      Campaigns
         Digital             [...]          [...]      Turku        2014
       Marketing
       Manager
    Sales Executive          [...]          [...]      Turku        2010
        Account              [...]          [...]     Helsinki      2017
       Executive
    Senior Analyst,
                             [...]          [...]      Turku        2011
    Debt Purchase
   Other debt purchasing (outside management team)
       Portfolio
     Analyst, Debt           [...]          [...]      Turku        2011
       Purchase
      Senior Debt            [...]          [...]      Turku        2014
      Purchasing
        Analyst
h. The arrangements for the supply with the following products or services by
   the Parties or Affiliated Undertakings for a transitional period of up to [...]
   (extendable on request of the Purchaser for up to [...]), or as otherwise
   specified below:
                                          5

                                     6(167)
         <U+F0B7>      IT: Shared Infrastructure services, e.g. data network services, data centre
                services and voice/services;
         <U+F0B7>      IT: Shared Workstation and end-user support services, e.g. PC and
                mobile device support, end-user helpdesk support;
         <U+F0B7>      IT: Shared Internet online services, e.g. client/debtor web services and
                reporting services;
         <U+F0B7>      IT: Shared Application services, e.g. administrative/finance systems,
                archiving and reporting systems;
         <U+F0B7>      Operations: certain back office services, data warehousing and finance
                functions outsourced to [one of the Baltic countries]; and
         <U+F0B7>      Licence for use of the Lindorff brand name in Finland for [...].
3. The Divestment Business shall not include:
   (i)     The Lindorff Oy branches in Latvia and Lithuania and the assets held by
           them;
   (ii)    One Group IT employee, as well as any contract in fact unrelated to the
           activities of the Divestment Business Finland, which are instead related only
           to group-wide activities.
           The Divestment Business Finland includes FTEs with equivalent functions at
           national level. The employee to be retained is currently formally employed
           by the entities falling within the Divestment Business Finland but his
           activities are entirely unconnected. The Notifying Party commits that all
           functions necessary for the viability of the Divestment Business Finland are
           nevertheless included.
4. If there is any asset or personnel which is not covered by paragraph 2 of this
   Schedule but which is both used (exclusively or not) in the Divestment Business
   and necessary for the continued viability and competitiveness of the Divestment
   Business, that asset or adequate substitute will be offered to potential
   purchasers.
   There are no such assets or personnel.
5. Financial information on the Divestment Business Finland
   The table below contains information from the accounts of Lindorff Oy, showing the
   turnover and EBITDA of the Divestment Business Finland. These figures cover the
   last three completed financial years and the forecast for 2017 and 2018.
                                             6

                                           7(167)
Figures  in 2014              2015              2016            2017              2018
EURm          Actual          Actual            Actual          Forecast          Forecast
Net revenue        [...]            [...]           [...]             [...]            [...]
EBITDA             [...]            [...]           [...]             [...]            [...]
EBITDA
                   [...]            [...]           [...]             [...]            [...]
Margin
         Approximately EUR [...] million of the revenues of Divestment Business Finland
         were generated from third party debt collection and approximately EUR [...] million
         came from the Historical Debt Portfolios.
         The main tangible assets of the Divestment Business Finland are the Historical Debt
         Portfolios, amounting to a total book value of EUR [...] million, consisting primarily
         of unsecured, non-performing consumer debts.
                                                  7

                                              Schedule B - Estonia
                   6.   The Divestment Business as operated to date has the following legal and
                        functional structure:
                        The Divestment Business in Estonia consists of Lindorff Eesti AS, which constitutes
                        the entirety of Lindorff’s debt collection and debt purchasing activities in Estonia
                        (the “Divestment Business Estonia”). The proposed commitments will remove the
                        entire overlap between Lindorff and Intrum Justitia in debt collection and debt
                        purchasing in Estonia.
                        The debt collection business functions by receiving payment for collecting on:
                        (iii)   debt owned by third parties; and
                        (iv)    in-house servicing of debt portfolios owned by Lindorff Eesti AS.
                        The debt collection activities provided range from sending reminders on behalf of
                        clients, to formal debt collection procedures (including legal action). The IT
                        systems, including any models, tools or other systems required for debt collection
                        are part of the Divestment Business (even if not in the Divestment Business Estonia
                        itself, which is a reflection of its current relationship with the Divestment Business
                        Finland) or provided via a transitional service (see 2(a) and (h) below). The
                        Divestment Business Estonia includes the entire credit management services
                        business of Lindorff in Estonia.
                        The debt purchasing business in Estonia involves a debt purchasing team operating
                        from Finland as part of Lindorff Oy (part of the Divestment Business Finland), with
                        analytical capabilities for evaluating debt portfolios available for sale on the market,
                        specifically providing origination services (i.e. contacts with sellers), valuation and
                        pricing of the portfolios and ongoing, active management of the portfolios (e.g.
                        determination of collection strategy) post-acquisition.           The Historical Debt
                        Portfolios relating to Estonia and owned by Lindorff Eesti AS also form part of the
                        Divestment Business Estonia. All statistical models necessary for valuing Historical
                        Debt Portfolios, all data and other records relating to historic collection on Historical
                        Debt Portfolios, any relevant IT systems necessary for debt purchasing activities,
                        including models, tools or other systems required will form part of the Divestment
                        Business, whether directly through the Divestment Business Estonia or via the
                        Divestment Business Finland.
                        The chart below illustrates the legal organisational structure of the Divestment
                        Business Estonia, which is part of the same corporate group as Lindorff Oy:
LEGAL#15241792v1




         The table below contains information showing the turnover and EBITDA of the
         Divestment Business Estonia. These figures cover the last three completed financial
         years and the forecast for 2017 and 2018.
Figures  in 2014               2015            2016            2017              2018
EURm          Actual           Actual          Actual          Forecast          Forecast
Net revenue        [...]             [...]          [...]            [...]            [...]
EBITDA             [...]             [...]          [...]            [...]            [...]
EBITDA
                   [...]             [...]          [...]            [...]            [...]
Margin
         Approximately EUR [...] million of the revenues of Divestment Business Estonia
         were generated from third party debt collection and approximately EUR [...] million
         came from the Historical Debt Portfolios.
         The main tangible assets of the Divestment Business Estonia are the Historical Debt
         Portfolios, amounting to a total book value of EUR [...] million, consisting primarily
         of unsecured, non-performing consumer debts.
                                                 5

                          Schedule C - Sweden
11. The Divestment Business as operated to date has the following legal and
    functional structure:
    The Divestment Business in Sweden consists of Lindorff Sverige AB, Lindorff
    Payment Services AB and Lindorff Payment Services Holding AB, which
    constitutes the entirety of Lindorff’s debt collection, other credit management
    services (namely payments and the invoice and information service), and debt
    purchasing activities in Sweden (the “Divestment Business Sweden”). The proposed
    commitments will remove the entire overlap between Lindorff and Intrum Justitia in
    debt collection and debt purchasing in Sweden.
    The debt collection business functions by receiving payment for collecting on:
    (v)    debt owned by third parties; and
    (vi)   in-house servicing of Historical Debt Portfolios owned by Lindorff Sverige
           AB.
    The debt collection activities provided range from sending reminders on behalf of
    clients, to formal debt collection procedures (including legal action). The IT
    systems, including any models, tools or other systems required for debt collection
    are part of the Divestment Business or offered as a transitional service (see 2(a) and
    (h) below). The Divestment Business Sweden includes the entire credit management
    services, including payments, business of Lindorff in Sweden.
    The debt purchasing business involves a debt purchasing team with analytical
    capabilities for evaluating debt portfolios available for sale on the market,
    specifically providing origination services (i.e. contacts with sellers), valuation and
    pricing of the portfolios and ongoing, active management of the portfolios (e.g.
    determination of collection strategy) post-acquisition.         The Historical Debt
    Portfolios relating to Sweden and owned by Lindorff Sverige AB also form part of
    the Divestment Business Sweden.
    The chart below illustrates the legal organisational structure of the Divestment
    Business Sweden:

12. In accordance with paragraph 5 of these Commitments, the Divestment
    Business includes, but is not limited to:
     a. The following main tangible assets:
          <U+F0B7>     employment contracts for approximately [200-300] full time employees,
                of which [0-10] work with debt purchasing;
          <U+F0B7>     the rental agreements for two office locations in Stockholm and
                Gothenburg and three storage sites in Stockholm (1) and Gothenburg (2);
          <U+F0B7>     the collection system;
          <U+F0B7>     over [5 000-7 000] external debt collection contracts entered into by
                Lindorff Sverige AB with its clients;
          <U+F0B7>     Historical Debt Portfolios currently owned by Lindorff Sverige AB;
          <U+F0B7>     all available data and models related to the Divestment Business Sweden
                – encompassing all (historical) data and models that have been acquired
                through collection on portfolios (either third party or owned) in Sweden
                and/or used for the purposes of debt collection and/or debt purchasing in
                Sweden – irrespective of which Lindorff entity is currently holding such
                data and models;
          <U+F0B7>     any relevant IT systems necessary for debt purchasing activities,
                including models, tools and other systems required; and
          <U+F0B7>     client payment contracts related to Sweden owned by Lindorff Payment
                Services AB.
    It is noted that the Divestment Business Sweden currently relies on the Payments
    and invoicing systems in the Divestment Business Finland.
     b. The following main intangible assets:
          <U+F0B7>     the consumer credit licence granted by the Swedish Financial
                Supervisory Authority (Finansinspektionen) to [...].
     c. The following main licences, permits and authorisations:
          See (b) above.
     d. The following main contracts, agreements, leases, commitments and
          understandings:
                                            2



         Head of new sales           [...]         [...]     -               -
         Head of KAM                 [...]         [...]     -               -
         KAM                         [...]         [...]     Stockholm       2015
         KAM                         [...]         [...]     Gothenburg      2016
         KAM                         [...]         [...]     Stockholm       2013
         KAM/Bid                     [...]         [...]     Stockholm       2015
         KAM                         [...]         [...]     Stockholm       2010
         Other debt purchasing (outside management team)
         Debt      purchasing        [...]         [...]     Stockholm       2014
         analyst
         Debt      purchasing        [...]         [...]     -               -
         analyst
     h. The arrangements for the supply with the following products or services by
         the Parties or Affiliated Undertakings for a transitional period of up to [...]
         (extendable on request of the Purchaser for up to [...]) or as otherwise
         specified below:
         <U+F0B7>       IT: Shared Infrastructure services, e.g. data network services, data centre
                 services and voice/ services;
         <U+F0B7>       IT: Shared Workstation and end-user support services, e.g. PC and
                 mobile device support, end-user helpdesk support;
         <U+F0B7>       IT: Shared Internet online services, e.g. client/debtor web services and
                 reporting services;
         <U+F0B7>       IT: Shared Application services, e.g. administrative/finance systems,
                 archiving and reporting systems;
         <U+F0B7>       Operations: certain back office services, data warehousing and finance
                 functions outsourced to [one of the Baltic countries]; and
         <U+F0B7>       Licence for use of the Lindorff brand name in Sweden for [...].
13. The Divestment Business shall not include:
    Approximately [10-20] employees providing work or services exclusively for other
    Lindorff Group-related functions, such as Group Legal and Compliance, Group IT
    and BI, Group HR and Group LBS (Shared Service Centre). The Divestment
    Business Sweden includes FTEs with equivalent functions at national level (with the
    exception of Group LBS and that is the outsourced back office centre in [one of the
    Baltic countries] which is being offered as a transitional service under 2(h) above).
                                              5

         The employees to be retained are currently formally employed by the entities falling
         within the Divestment Business Sweden but their activities are entirely unconnected.
         The Notifying Party commits that all functions necessary for the viability of the
         Divestment Business Sweden are nevertheless included.
    14.  If there is any asset or personnel which is not covered by paragraph 2 of this
         Schedule but which is both used (exclusively or not) in the Divestment Business
         and necessary for the continued viability and competitiveness of the Divestment
         Business, that asset or adequate substitute will be offered to potential
         purchasers.
         There are no such assets or personnel.
    15.  Financial information on the Divestment Business Sweden
         The table below contains information from the accounts of Lindorff Sverige AB,
         showing the turnover and EBITDA of the Divestment Business Sweden. These
         figures cover the last three completed financial years and the forecast for 2017 and
         2018.
Figures  in 2014               2015             2016            2017              2018
EURm          Actual           Actual           Actual          Forecast          Forecast
Net revenue        [...]            [...]           [...]             [...]            [...]
EBITDA             [...]            [...]           [...]             [...]            [...]
EBITDA
                   [...]            [...]           [...]             [...]            [...]
Margin
         Approximately EUR [...] million of the revenues of Divestment Business Sweden
         were generated from third party debt collection and approximately EUR [...] million
         came from the Historical Debt Portfolios.
         The main tangible assets of the Divestment Business Sweden are the Historical Debt
         Portfolios, amounting to a total book value of EUR [...] million, consisting primarily
         of unsecured, non-performing consumer debt.
                                                 6

                       Schedule D - Denmark
16. The Divestment Business as operated to date has the following legal and
    functional structure:
    The Divestment Business in Denmark consists of Lindorff Danmark A/S and
    Lindorff A/S, which constitutes the entirety of Lindorff’s debt collection, other
    credit management services (namely payments and the invoice and information
    service), and debt purchasing activities relating to Denmark (the “Divestment
    Business Denmark”). The proposed commitments will remove the entire overlap
    between Lindorff and Intrum Justitia in debt collection and debt purchasing in
    Denmark.
    The debt collection business functions by receiving payment for collecting on:
    (vii) debt owned by third parties; and
    (viii) in-house servicing of historical debt portfolios owned by Lindorff Danmark
           A/S.
    The debt collection activities provided range from sending reminders on behalf of
    clients, to formal debt collection procedures (including legal action). The IT
    systems, including any models, tools or other systems required for debt collection
    are part of the Divestment Business or offered as a transitional service (see 2(a) and
    (h) below). The Divestment Business Denmark includes the entire credit
    management services, including payments, business of Lindorff in Denmark.
    The debt purchasing business involves a debt purchasing team with analytical
    capabilities for evaluating debt portfolios available for sale on the market,
    specifically providing origination services (i.e. contacts with sellers), valuation and
    pricing of the portfolios and ongoing, active management of the portfolios (e.g.
    determination of collection strategy) post-acquisition. The historical debt portfolios
    owned by Lindorff Danmark A/S also form part of the Divestment Business
    Denmark.
    The chart below illustrates the legal organisational structure of the Divestment
    Business Denmark:

17. In accordance with paragraph 5 of these Commitments, the Divestment
    Business includes, but is not limited to:
     a. The following main tangible assets:
     <U+F0B7>      employment contracts for approximately [100-200] full time employees, of
            which [0-10] work with debt purchasing;
     <U+F0B7>      the rental agreements for two office locations in Taastrup and Horsens;
     <U+F0B7>      approximately [150-300] external debt collection contracts entered into by
            Lindorff Danmark A/S with its clients;
     <U+F0B7>      Historical Debt Portfolios currently owned by Lindorff Danmark A/S;
     <U+F0B7>      all available data and models related to the Divestment Business Denmark –
            encompassing all (historical) data and models that have been acquired
            through collection on portfolios (either third party or owned) in Denmark
            and/or used for the purposes of debt collection and/or debt purchasing in
            Denmark – irrespective of which Lindorff entity is currently holding such
            data and models;
     <U+F0B7>      relevant IT systems necessary for debt purchasing activities, including
            models, tools and other systems required; and
     <U+F0B7>      client payment contracts related to Denmark owned by Lindorff A/S.
    It is noted the Divestment Business Denmark does not have its own collection
    system (it currently uses a system outside of Denmark within Lindorff). The
    Notifying Party commits to agree with the Purchaser a transitional service or
    licensing arrangement on an unlimited, irrevocable, sub-licensable basis (on terms
    equivalent to those currently afforded the Divestment Business Denmark) to
    replicate the current set-up. The latter would allow a Purchaser effectively to
    reproduce a collection system such that it would become a licensing asset of the
    Divestment Business Denmark. Furthermore, the Divestment Business does not
    have its own Payments or invoicing systems and relies on the systems in the
    Divestment Business Finland.
                                             2



              <U+F0B7>     IT: Shared Workstation and end-user support services, e.g. PC and mobile
                    device support, end-user helpdesk support;
              <U+F0B7>     IT: Shared Internet online services, e.g. client/debtor web services and
                    reporting services;
              <U+F0B7>     IT: Shared Application services, e.g. administrative/finance systems,
                    archiving and reporting systems;
              <U+F0B7>     IT: collection system for third party collections operated by Lindorff in
                    Norway under licence; and
              <U+F0B7>     Licence for use of the Lindorff brand name in Denmark for [...].
    18.  The Divestment Business shall not include:
         Certain functions, employees, contracts and products related to group-wide
         activities, including the Group Portfolio Manager and the Director of Debt
         Collection Services.
         The Divestment Business Denmark includes FTEs with equivalent functions
         at national level. The employees to be retained are currently formally
         employed by the entities falling within the Divestment Business Denmark but
         their activities are entirely unconnected. The Notifying Party commits that
         all functions necessary for the viability of the Divestment Business Denmark
         are nevertheless included.
    19.  If there is any asset or personnel which is not covered by paragraph 2 of this
         Schedule but which is both used (exclusively or not) in the Divestment Business
         and necessary for the continued viability and competitiveness of the Divestment
         Business, that asset or adequate substitute will be offered to potential
         purchasers.
         There are no such assets or personnel.
    20.  Financial information on the Divestment Business Denmark
         The table below contains information showing the turnover and EBITDA of the
         Divestment Business Denmark. These figures cover the last three completed
         financial years and the forecast for 2017 and 2018.
Figures  in 2014                 2015             2016             2017            2018
EURm          Actual             Actual           Actual           Forecast        Forecast
Net revenue          [...]            [...]            [...]            [...]            [...]
EBITDA               [...]            [...]            [...]            [...]            [...]
EBITDA
                     [...]            [...]            [...]            [...]            [...]
Margin
                                                   5

Approximately EUR [...] million of the revenues of Divestment Business Denmark
were generated from third party debt collection and approximately EUR [...] million
came from the Historical Debt Portfolios.
The main tangible assets of the Divestment Business Denmark are the historical debt
portfolios, amounting to a total book value of EUR [...] million, consisting primarily
of unsecured, non-performing consumer debts.
                                        6

                                                      Schedule E – Norway
                       21.     The Divestment Business as operated to date has the following legal and
                               functional structure:
                               The Divestment Business in Norway consists of Intrum Justitia AS (including
                               subsidiary Intrum Justitia Finans AS), which constitutes the entirety of Intrum
                               Justitia’s credit management services (“CMS”) business (mostly debt collection, but
                               also Sales Ledger Services), and debt purchasing business in Norway (the
                               “Divestment Business Norway”). The proposed commitments will remove the entire
                               overlap between Lindorff and Intrum Justitia in debt collection and debt purchasing
                               in Norway.
                               The debt collection business functions by receiving payment for collecting on:
                               (ix)   debt owned by third parties; and
                               (x)    in-house servicing of Intrum Justitia Norwegian Historical Debt Portfolios
                                      which are owned by separate legal entities (Intrum Justitia Finans AS, a
                                      subsidiary of Intrum Justitia AS, and Intrum Justitia Debt Finance AG).
                               The debt collection activities provided range from sending reminders on behalf of
                               clients, to formal debt collection procedures (including legal action). This means
                               that the Divestment Business Norway includes the entire CMS business of Intrum
                               Justitia in Norway.
                               The debt purchasing business involves all the Norwegian resources of Intrum Justitia
                               AS, namely a debt purchasing manager, and around [0-10] debt collection staff
                               dedicated to collection on Norwegian Historical Debt Portfolios.1 Intrum Justitia AS
                               does not include debt purchase analysts since to date it has not performed the
                               volume of debt purchasing to justify a full time employee. The company obtains
                               debt purchase analysis assistance on an ad hoc basis from the wider Intrum Justitia
                               business.2
                               The Notifying Party undertakes to use best efforts (with reference to industry
                               standard) to incentivise at least one debt purchase analyst who has assisted Intrum
                               Justitia Norway in the past in the valuation of debt portfolios in Norway from
                               another part of Intrum Justitia to transfer to the Divestment Business. Should the
                               relevant analyst(s) not agree to join the Divestment Business, the Notifying Party
                               shall (with reference to industry standard) incentivise at least one debt purchase
                               analyst from any part of Intrum Justitia to transfer to the Divestment Business or,
                   1   Debt collection staff are not allocated exclusively to collection on third party debts or Historical Debt
LEGAL#15229019v3
                       Portfolios. However, it is estimated that, on average, around [0-10] full time employees are engaged
                       in collection on Norwegian Historical Debt Portfolios.
                   2   Analysts build statistical models from scratch for evaluation of debt portfolios in Norway on a case-
                       by-case basis.

    failing that, recruit a debt purchase analyst to Intrum Justitia AS by the time of
    divestment. The Notifying Party undertakes to train the analyst that has been
    recruited to Intrum Justitia AS, or alternatively moved from another part of Intrum
    Justitia to the Divestment Business, in the relevant field, covering in particular
    Intrum Justitia’s models, know-how and experience in debt purchasing both in
    general and specifically in Norway.
    The [...] debt collection IT system, which is included in the Divestment Business
    Norway (see details further below), contains all data relating to historic collection on
    Norwegian Historical Debt Portfolios. No other IT resources are required for debt
    purchasing. This means that the Divestment Business Norway includes the entire
    debt purchasing business of Intrum Justitia in Norway. It also includes ownership of
    Norwegian Historical Debt Portfolios:
         <U+F0B7>   Intrum Justitia Finans AS, a subsidiary of Intrum Justitia AS owns all
             Intrum Justitia Norwegian financial Historical Debt Portfolios and will
             transfer together with Intrum Justitia AS as part of the Divestment Business
             Norway;
         <U+F0B7>   Intrum Justitia Debt Finance AG (Zug, Switzerland) owns the Norwegian
             non-financial Historical Debt Portfolios, and these Historical Debt
             Portfolios will be transferred without delay after the Effective Date to
             Intrum Justitia Finans AS, in order to form part of the Divestment Business
             Norway.
    The chart below illustrates the legal organisational structure of the Divestment
    Business Norway:
22. In accordance with paragraph 5 of these Commitments, the Divestment
    Business includes, but is not limited to:
                                            2

           a. The following main tangible assets:
           <U+F0B7>      the approximately [100-200] full time employees ([0-10] engaged in debt
                  purchasing, one of whom is yet to be identified);
           <U+F0B7>      the rented office located in Oslo;
           <U+F0B7>      around [3 000-5 000] external debt collection contracts entered into by
                  Intrum Justitia AS with its clients;
           <U+F0B7>      all Norwegian Historical Debt Portfolios; and
           <U+F0B7>      all available data and models related to the Divestment Business Norway –
                  encompassing all (historical) data and models that have been acquired
                  through collection on portfolios (either third party or owned) in Norway
                  and/or used for the purposes of debt collection and/or debt purchasing in
                  Norway, irrespective of which Intrum Justitia entity is currently holding such
                  data and models.
           b. The following main intangible assets:
           The debt collection IT system, [...] (provided by [...] under license to Intrum Justitia
           Norway AS). Transfer of the existing license as part of the Divestment Business
           Norway requires approval from [...],3 and the Notifying Party will use best efforts to
           secure the approval from [...] for the transfer of the existing license.
           c. The following main licences, permits and authorisations:
           Intrum Justitia AS holds a debt collection license granted by the Norwegian
           financial services authority (Finanstilsynet).
           A financial license from Finanstilsynet allowing Intrum Justitia Finans AS to own
           Norwegian financial debt portfolios.4
           d. The following main contracts, agreements, leases, commitments and
                understandings:
           The top ten external debt collection contracts are listed below:
3 Note that Intrum Justitia Norway AS acquired the [...] license through its acquisition of [...]in 2010,
  and received approval from [...] at that time to take over the license.
4 The existing financial license would need to be altered from Intrum Justitia to the purchaser based on
  an application to Finanstilsynet. This can be arranged in time for closing of the sale of the
  Divestment Business.
                                                        3




              <U+F0B7>    System for Sales Ledger Services (Intrum Justitia’s own pan-Nordic
                   system that handles the administration of sending out invoices, reminders
                   etc.);
              <U+F0B7>    Intrum Justitia’s own online solutions for communication with clients and
                   debtors (group-wide web portal); and
              <U+F0B7>    Licence for use of the Intrum Justitia brand name in Norway for up to [...].
    23.  The Divestment Business shall not include:
         The Divestment Business Norway is that of Intrum Justitia AS as it exists today,
         including its subsidiary Intrum Justitia Finans AS. There are no exclusions.
    24.  If there is any asset or personnel which is not covered by paragraph 2 of this
         Schedule but which is both used (exclusively or not) in the Divestment Business
         and necessary for the continued viability and competitiveness of the Divestment
         Business, that asset or adequate substitute will be offered to potential
         purchasers.
         There are no such assets or personnel.
    25.  Financial information on the Divestment Business Norway
         Please see below an extract from the accounts of Intrum Justitia AS showing the
         turnover and EBITDA of the Divestment Business Norway.
Targeted business - Norway (Intrum Justitia AS)
Figures  in 2014               2015              2016            2017F           2018F
EURm
Total
                    [...]            [...]            [...]          [...]            [...]
revenue
EBITDA              [...]            [...]            [...]          [...]            [...]
EBITDA
                    [...]            [...]            [...]          [...]            [...]
Margin
Key assumptions
General                                                              [...]
Revenue                                                              [...]
Expenses                                                             [...]
                                                  7

The Divestment Business Norway includes the Historical Debt Portfolios relating to
Norway, amounting to a total book value of around EUR [...] million.
Of the EUR [...] million revenue of the Divestment Business Norway, roughly EUR
[...] million ([...]%) is attributable to income from the Norwegian Historical Debt
Portfolios, while roughly EUR [...] million ([...]%) is attributable to CMS (mostly
third party debt collection, which accounts for roughly EUR [...] million turnover).
                                           8

                                      Schedule F – Group Functions
                   26.   Legal and functional structure
                         The Divestment Business consists of the Divestment Business Denmark, the
                         Divestment Business Estonia, the Divestment Business Finland, the Divestment
                         Business Norway and the Divestment Business Sweden (the “National
                         Businesses”). The structure and functions of each National Business is described in
                         Schedules A-E. Debt collection, other credit management services and debt
                         purchasing activities – as well as most of the supporting functions, such as HR,
                         legal, and building management – are performed on a national level, which means
                         that the National Businesses are independent and self-sufficient entities.
                         The Lindorff Group, to which most of the National Businesses currently belong, is
                         decentralised and provides very limited group functions to its subsidiaries, especially
                         in Northern Europe, where the Lindorff entities are long-established market players
                         with well-developed local organisations and structures (the same is true of Intrum
                         Justitia AS in Norway, in relation to Intrum Justitia Group). The functions provided
                         to these companies by the Lindorff group are limited to coordination,
                         standardisation, alignment and advisory services within the following areas, together
                         referred to as the “Group Functions”:
                              <U+F0B7>     Communication;
                              <U+F0B7>     Debt Purchasing;
                              <U+F0B7>     Finance;
                              <U+F0B7>     HR;
                              <U+F0B7>     IT;
                              <U+F0B7>     Legal & Compliance; and
                              <U+F0B7>     Sales.
                         In order to ensure that the Divestment Business has continued access to the Group
                         Functions on a pan-Nordic level, the Notifying Party has set up a Divestment Group
                         Organisation, consisting of senior, experienced Key Employees, currently either
                         working for the Lindorff Group, or performing Group Functions on the level of the
                         National Businesses. Divestment Group Organisation Key Employees will work
                         exclusively at the Divestment Group level, ensuring effective group management
LEGAL#15228961v3
                         and support for all National Businesses.


               CEO / Hold Separate
                                                [...]
                    Manager for
                                           (subject to EC       [...]    Norway          2016
                     Divestment
                                             approval)
                       Business
                                                [...]
                         CFO              (Recruitment in       [...]        -              -
                                             progress)
                       Head of
                                                [...]           [...]    Sweden          2016
                 Communications
                     Head of HR                 [...]           [...]    Finland         2010
                      Head of IT                [...]           [...]    Finland         2014
                  Head of Legal &
                                                [...]           [...]   Denmark          2017
                     Compliance
                    Head of Sales              [...]2           [...]   Denmark          2012
             Note that in neither Lindorff nor Intrum Justitia is there a group function for debt
             collection; this activity is operated and managed entirely at a national level. Hence,
             there is no provision for a debt collection group function in the Divestment Business.
             The Key Personnel responsible for Divestment Business group functions other than
             activities specific to the debt purchasing industry (listed under “Other” in the table
             above) are included in the Divestment business at the discretion of the Purchaser.
             However, they will in any event take up their group function roles immediately
             following the Effective Date to ensure the effective management of the Divestment
             Business until Closing.
             The competences and envisaged functions of the Divestment Group Organisation
             Key Personnel are described in more detail below.
             [...], CEO and Hold Separate Manager (subject to EC approval)
             Background: [...]
             Envisaged function: [...] will be responsible for the day to day management of the
             Divestment Business on the group level, as well as the development of business
             strategies and objectives for the Divestment Business. At the Effective Date, [...] will
             also be appointed the Hold Separate Manager of the Divestment Business.
2 [...] has not yet accepted the position as [Head of Sales] for the Divestment Group Organisation.
     However, the Parties are confident that they will secure his acceptance shortly, and in any event
     before the Effective Date.
                                                         3

CFO (under recruitment)
The Parties are in the process of recruiting a CFO for the Divestment Group
Organisation and commit to fill the position with a person possessing the appropriate
competences and experience of supra-national group management functions prior to,
or as soon as possible after the Effective Date. The Parties are primarily searching
for suitable candidates within the Divestment Business and, as a second option,
within the Lindorff and Intrum Justitia Groups. A short list of candidates will be
presented to the Commission before the Effective Date.
Envisaged function: XX will be responsible for the financial objectives, policies,
processes and programs for the Divestment Business, in order to ensure that the
Divestment Business has a strong and sound financial and accounting structure.
[...] (Communications)
Background: [...].
Envisaged function: [...] will be promoted to his/her new position prior to the
Effective Date. As Group Head of Communications of the Divestment business, [...]
will be responsible for managing the public relations of the Divestment Business,
write and deliver press releases, handle media contacts and produce public relations
policies for the Divestment Business. This will ensure that the National Businesses
have access to Communications group functions equivalent to the ones currently
provided by the Lindorff and Intrum Justitia Groups.
[...] (Debt Purchasing)
Background: [...]
Envisaged function: [...] will retain his/her position as Head of Debt Purchasing for
the entities encompassed by the Divestment Business after the Effective Date. As
Group Head of Debt Purchasing of the Divestment business, [...] will be responsible
for coordination of cross-border debt purchasing activities, management and
execution of large debt portfolios (including performance management) and
analytical support. This will ensure that the National Businesses have access to Debt
Purchasing group functions equivalent to the ones currently provided by the Lindorff
and Intrum Justitia Groups.
[...] (HR)
Background: [...].
Envisaged function: [...] will be promoted to his/her new position prior to the
Effective Date. As Group Head of HR of the Divestment business, [...] will oversee,
coordinate and govern HR policies across the Divestment Business, ensuring that the
National Businesses have access to HR services equivalent to the ones currently
provided by the Lindorff and Intrum Justitia Groups.
[...] (IT)
Background: [...].
                                         4

Envisaged function: [...] will promoted to his/her new position prior to the Effective
Date. As Group Head of IT of the Divestment business, [...] will be responsible for
ensuring that the Divestment Business continues to develop and use the best
technology solutions on the market. This will ensure that the National Businesses
have access to IT group functions equivalent to the ones currently provided by the
Lindorff and Intrum Justitia Groups.
[...] (Legal & Compliance)
Background: [...].
Envisaged function: […] will promoted to his/her new position prior to the
Effective Date. As Group Head of Legal&Compliance of the Divestment business,
[...] will coordinate and oversee the compliance functions of the Divestment
Business, ensure strict compliance with legal rules and guidelines in all relevant
countries and provide advice on legal matters to the Management. This will ensure
that the National Businesses have access to Legal & Compliance group functions
equivalent to the ones currently provided by the Lindorff and Intrum Justitia Groups.
[...] (Sales)
Background: [...].
Envisaged function: [...] will be promoted to his/her new position prior to the
Effective Date. As Group Head of Sales of the Divestment business, [...] will be
responsible for the leadership and performance, together with national sales
directors, of cross-border business development targeted on the acquisition and
retention of clients, revenue growth and the development of cross-border accounts.
This will ensure that the National Businesses have access to Sales group functions
equivalent to the ones currently provided by the Lindorff and Intrum Justitia Groups.
c. Should the Purchaser decide not to acquire certain other Group Functions
(as listed above) as part of the Divestment Business, arrangements can be made
by the Notifying Party for the supply of the Group Functions to the Divestment
Business for a transitional period of up to [...] (extendable on request of the
Purchaser for up to [...]).
                                        5
