                                 EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                Brussels, 7.4.2017
                                                                C(2017) 2450 final
In the published version of this decision, some                         PUBLIC VERSION
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
                                                                To the notifying party:
 Subject:        Case M.8257 - NN Group / Delta Lloyd
                 Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation
                 No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the European Economic
                 Area2
 Dear Sir or Madam,
 1.     On 22 February 2017, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
        concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/20043 by
        which NN Group N.V. (‘NN’) of the Netherlands acquires within the meaning of
        Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation control of the whole of Delta Lloyd N.V.
        (‘Delta Lloyd’), also of the Netherlands by way of a public bid announced on
        2 February 2017 (‘the Transaction’). NN is referred to as ‘the Notifying Party’ and
        NN and Delta Lloyd are collectively referred to as ‘the Parties’.
 I.     THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
 2.     NN is a Netherlands-based financial services provider active in the provision of life
        and non-life insurance policies, pension products, banking and asset management to
 1      OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the ‘Merger Regulation’). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty
        on the Functioning of the European Union (‘TFEU’) has introduced certain changes, such as the
        replacement of ‘Community’ by ‘Union’ and ‘common market’ by ‘internal market’. The
        terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
 2      OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the ‘EEA Agreement’).
 3      OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the “Merger Regulation”).
 Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
 Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
 Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

      both individuals and corporations. It is active in 18 countries worldwide, including a
      number of European markets.
3.    Delta Lloyd is a Netherlands-based financial services provider active in the
      provision and distribution of life and non-life insurance policies, pension products,
      banking services and asset management to both individuals and corporations. It is
      active in the Netherlands and Belgium.
4.    The Transaction involves the acquisition within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) by
      NN of the whole of Delta Lloyd by way of a public bid announced on
      2 February 2017. This formal offer marked the start of a nine-week offer period
      (ending 7 April) during which Delta Lloyd shareholders can choose to sell to NN on
      the terms set out in the bid.
II. EU DIMENSION
5.    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
      more than EUR 5 000 million4 (NN EUR [10 000 - 15 000] million, Delta Lloyd
      EUR [0 - 5 000] million). Each of them has EU-wide turnover in excess of
      EUR 250 million (NN EUR [5 000 - 1 0000] million, Delta Lloyd EUR [0 - 5000]
      million). Delta Lloyd achieves more than two thirds of its aggregate EU-wide
      turnover within one and the same Member State (the Netherlands) but NN does not.
      The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension.
III. MARKET DEFINITIONS
III.1. Introduction
6.    NN and Delta Lloyd are both Netherlands-based financial services providers, whose
      principal activity is in the area of insurance. They both offer pension products, life
      and non-life insurance policies, alongside various banking services. The Transaction
      leads to horizontal and vertical links in the Netherlands and in Belgium.
7.    In the Netherlands, the Transaction creates a number of horizontally affected
      markets within the following broad markets: pension products and pension fund
      buy-outs, individual life insurance, non-life insurance and insurance services to
      pension funds. In addition, it also creates vertically affected markets between the
      production of insurance and: the downstream market for insurance distribution, the
      upstream market for asset management, the upstream market for pensions
      administration services and the upstream market for reinsurance.
8.    In Belgium, the Transaction leads to several horizontal overlaps and vertical links
      between various markets in the area of insurance, insurance distribution, reinsurance
      and asset management. None of them is, however, an affected market.
9.    The following assessment therefore focuses on the specific characteristics of the
      relevant product and geographic markets in the Netherlands.
4     Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
      Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
                                                        2

III.2. Relevant markets
10. In previous decisions relating to the insurance sector, the Commission has
      distinguished between a product market for insurance provision and a product
      market for insurance distribution.
11. Within the upstream market for insurance provision, three broad categories of
      insurance products can be further distinguished: life insurance, non-life insurance
      and re-insurance.5 The Commission has considered the possibility that both life and
      non-life insurance could be divided into as many different product markets as there
      are types of risks to insure. This possible distinction is based on the fact that the
      characteristics and purpose of the different types of insurance are distinct, and that
      there is typically no substitutability between different types of insurance from a
      customer’s perspective.6 The Commission has, however, also noted a previous case
      that there were indications of potential degree of supply-side substitutability
      between some insurance products.7 Within the downstream market for insurance
      distribution, the Commission considered that a distinction could be made between
      the distribution of non-life and life insurance products and left the question of
      further segmentation open.8 In its past practice, the Commission has also left open
      the possibility of whether the market for insurance distribution comprises
      exclusively third-party outward insurance distribution channels (such as brokers,
      agents and banks) or whether direct sales forces should also fall within the market
      for insurance distribution.9
        III.2.A. Life insurance
12. The Commission has further considered segmenting the life insurance market
      according to the purpose served by the product, distinguishing between: (i) pure risk
      protection products; (ii) savings and investment products; and (iii) pension
      products.10 In addition, the Commission has considered a possible segmentation of
      these product markets between group and individual products.11
13. The Notifying party agrees with the definition of a possible market for pension
      products, but argues that a segmentation between pure risk protection and savings
      and investment products is not appropriate in the Netherlands. Likewise, the
      Notifying Party notes that in the Netherlands pension products are offered only to
      group customers (employers acting on behalf of their employees), whilst pure risk
      protection products and savings and investment products are both only offered on an
      individual basis.
14. The respondents to the market investigation confirmed the Notifying Party’s claim
      that there is a strong distinction in the Netherlands between pension products, on the
      one hand, and individual life insurance (including both pure protection and savings
5     See COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas/Fortis, COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur.
6     See COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas/Fortis, COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur.
7     See COMP/M.7478 Aviva/Friends Life/Tenet.
8     See COMP/M. 4284 AXA/Winterthur, COMP/M.6957 IF P&C/TopDanmark.
9     See COMP/M.6957 IF P&C/TOPDANMARK, COMP/M.6053 CVC/Apollo/Brit Insurance.
10    See COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance business, COMP/M.6521 Talanx International Meiji
      Yasuda Life insurance/Warta.
11    See COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV, COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance
      Business.
                                                   3

    and investment products) on the other. Indeed, in the Netherlands, the former are
    purchased by employers for the sake of their employees (group products) while the
    latter are only purchased by individuals (individual products). Furthermore, pension
    products can only be distributed by professional intermediaries holding a specific
    regulatory license and, thus, insurers are not allowed to sell their pension products
    directly to customers. Conversely, individual insurance products are purchased by
    and at the initiative of interested individuals directly from insurers or via any
    distribution channel.
15. In view of the above, the Commission considers that the segmentation of life
    insurance into pension products, pure risk protection products and savings and
    investment products makes any further segmentation into group and individual
    products redundant in this case since, in the Netherlands, pension products are group
    products while pure risk protection and savings and investments are necessarily
    individual products. The product markets to be analysed are: (i) pension products
    for group customers; (ii) pure risk protection products for individuals; and
    (iii) savings and investment products for individuals.
16. The Commission previously considered the geographic market for life insurance and
    its respective segments to be national in scope, as a result of national distribution
    channels, established market structures, fiscal constraints and specific regulatory
    systems among Member States; however the exact geographic market definition has
    been left open.12 The market investigation in the present case has not provided any
    evidence that would indicate that the market for life insurance in the Netherlands
    should not be considered national in scope.
       III.2.A.1 Pension products
17. Within pension products, the Commission has considered several distinctions which
    can be made, in particular between defined benefit (DB) and defined contribution
    (DC) pension types, and has also identified the existence of distinct accumulation
    and decumulation products.13
18. The Notifying Party contends that there is no need to consider narrower hypothetical
    markets,       such       as      those       described      above    (DB/DC         schemes,
    accumulation/decumulation products), and submits that in the Netherlands there is
    one broad market for group pension products, which should not be further
    segmented.
    Distinction between DB and DC schemes
19. Under a DB scheme, each employee is guaranteed a pension equivalent to a fixed
    percentage of their final or average salary earnings (depending on the terms of the
    scheme). Under a DC scheme, meanwhile, the employer and the employee each pay
    a fixed contribution (a percentage of the employee’s salary), and this is then
    invested for the employee. The return achieved on the investment determines the
    value of the individual’s pension at retirement age, and he/she can then purchase an
    annuity with this capital sum.
12  See COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV; COMP/M.5057 Aviva/UBI Vita, COMP/M.6521
    Talanx International / Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance / Warta, COMP/M.6883 – Canada Life/Irish Life.
13  See COMP/M.7478 Aviva/Friends Life/Tenet.
                                                      4

20. The distinction between DB and DC is blurred in the Netherlands, due to the variety
    of different pension arrangements present on the market (see section IV.8): DB
    schemes offered by insurers include a guaranteed level of pension benefit but most
    of the industry pension funds, for example, are structured as DB pension schemes
    but with pension benefits that can be reduced or no longer indexed if the scheme is
    underfunded. Similarly, a further distinction can also be made within DC schemes
    between unit-linked and non-unit-linked policies: unit-linked DC policies could be
    described as ‘pure DC’ policies, as they do not offer any form of guarantees,
    whereas non-unit-linked DC policies incorporate aspects of DB policies, in that they
    include certain guarantees in respect of the value of the capital accumulated over the
    period up to retirement, and the risk is therefore not entirely with the members.
21. As set out below, the market investigation revealed that the most natural
    segmentation of the market for pension products would be between defined benefit
    (DB) and defined contribution (DC) products, as recognised in past Commission
    decisions.14
22. From a demand-side perspective, customers of group pension products are
    employers acting on behalf of their employees. The employers who responded to the
    market investigation appeared to be well aware of the fundamental difference
    between the two types of pension scheme insofar as, under a DB arrangement, the
    risk is borne by the employer (meaning they are liable for a pension shortfall),
    whereas under a DC arrangement, the risk is borne by the employee. A large
    majority of respondents (customers, distributors and competitors) also
    acknowledged that DB has largely become unaffordable for new customers in the
    Netherlands. This means that DB and DC schemes are only competing in cases
    where a customer (employer) has the choice of renewing a DB policy or moving to
    DC. An employer that already has a DC arrangement is highly unlikely ever to wish
    to move back to DB (due to the risks for the employer mentioned above). To
    conclude, from a demand side perspective, DB and DC pension products seem to
    constitute separate markets as they tend to address different needs, in particular
    related to risk appetite and/or the ability to incur significant costs for future benefits.
23. From a supply-side perspective, offering DB products requires an insurer to hold
    much higher capital levels than they have to for DC products (under solvency
    regulations), reflecting the higher level of risk involved. Setting aside industry and
    company pension funds (which are, to some extent, a closed market and which are
    further described in section IV.2 129 and IV.4 below), providers of pensions in the
    Netherlands are not necessarily present in both DC and DB. All the main six
    insurers have clients for both types of pension arrangements, but some only offer
    DB to existing DB clients (i.e. renewals) and others are thought not to be offering
    DB anymore at all. At the same time, the new pension vehicles that have recently
    been introduced on the Dutch market are very much oriented towards either DB or
    DC. Premiepensioeninstellingen (PPIs) are only licensed to offer DC pension
    schemes whilst algemeen pensioenfonds (APFs) were designed as a solution for
    company pension funds, whose schemes are almost always structured as DB
    (although without absolute guarantees). Although there are currently two APFs
    which also offer DC pension arrangements, the general expectation, in particular
14  See COMP/M.7478 Aviva/Friends Life/Tenet, COMP/M.7204 Rothesay Life/Metlife Assurance.
                                                  5

    expressed by distributors of pension products15 seems to be that APFs will be much
    stronger in DB since they constitute an attractive alternative to liquidating company
    pension funds (OPF) most of which currently operate DB schemes.16 From both the
    demand and the supply side, there therefore seems to be a strong suggestion that DB
    and DC pension products constitute separate markets, with different (although not
    mutually exclusive) sets of providers, and significantly different product
    characteristics.
24. For the purpose of this case, the question as to whether DB and DC pension
    products form separate product markets can, in any event, be left open, as the
    Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition on the market for
    pension products under any plausible market definitions based on the potential
    distinction between DB and DC pension schemes and the further segmentation of
    DC schemes into unit-linked and non-unit-linked products.
    Distinction between accumulation and decumulation products
25. Pension products are comprised of two distinct phases: accumulation and
    decumulation, the accumulation phase being the period during which an active
    scheme member pays contributions into his/her pension and the decumulation phase
    being the payment out of the pension after retirement age, via an annuity. The
    distinction between accumulation and decumulation does not, however, have the
    same relevance in DC and DB policies.
26. DB policies do not allow an individual to move to a different provider for the
    decumulation phase. Accumulation and decumulation are provided as part of one
    DB product, i.e. neither could exist independently.
27. A member of a DC pension scheme, meanwhile, can change the provider for the
    decumulation phase: on reaching retirement age, each individual has the opportunity
    to shop around for an annuity product, which will provide a retirement income
    during the decumulation phase. The market investigation provided some evidence to
    suggest that a distinction could be made between accumulation and decumulation
    products within the market for DC pension products. From a demand-side
    perspective, the products are clearly in no way substitutable as they serve customers
    in distinct phases of their pension – saving for the pension, and payment out of the
    pension, respectively. In addition, the customer is also different, with DC
    accumulation schemes being purchased by employers, whilst annuities are chosen
    by the individual members.
28. From a supply side point of view, the two products could, in very general terms, be
    seen as requiring the same resources and expertise, as both are insurance products.
    They also require the same type of communication with pension scheme members.
    Insurers who provide DC schemes to employers typically also offer annuities for the
15  “Onderzoek Algemene Pensioenfondsen 2016” by Sprenkels & Verschuren published in December
    2016. (Sprenkels & Verschuren is an actuarial consultancy that advises pension funds, company
    boards, the parties to collective labour agreements, insurers, not-for-profit organisations and local
    government.)
    Further confirmation about such general expectation on the market have been presented to the
    Commission during pre-notification calls and some replies to question 6.2 of questionnaire Q1 to
    competitors.
16  See section IV.4
                                                     6

    members to buy on retirement. The market investigation provided an example of an
    insurer that had become active on the DC market recently, and therefore had not
    immediately offered annuities, but had subsequently introduced this product. There
    was no other evidence, however, of insurers choosing to only offer accumulation or
    decumulation products respectively. In addition, the very high percentage of
    customers thought to purchase an annuity from the provider of their DC
    accumulation scheme (usually for convenience) suggests that it would be very
    difficult to operate successfully in the decumulation market alone, i.e. as a provider
    of annuities, without also offering DC schemes. To conclude it appears that as
    regards the supply side a distinction between accumulation and decumulation
    products seems less relevant, since both categories of products require the same
    resources and most providers offer both of them.
29. It should, however, also be noted that a certain category of providers of DC pension
    products in the Netherlands (PPIs, see section IV.6 below) had not until very
    recently been licensed to sell any decumulation products. PPIs are not required to
    meet the same solvency requirements as insurers and therefore cannot take on the
    risks that these products involve. The recent introduction of variable annuities in the
    Netherlands (described in more detail in the following section) means that PPIs can
    now offer decumulation products, but only in the form of variable annuities. Since
    these products have been introduced only recently it is yet too soon to be able to
    predict with any certainty how popular variable annuities will become. Some
    respondents to the market investigation expected variable annuities to remain very
    much a minor product on the market, with only a small minority of customers
    potentially being interested. In any event, PPIs are not allowed to offer fixed
    annuities, which at least for the moment remain the most popular decumulation
    products. The fact that certain (important) category of providers of pension
    accumulation products, are not allowed to provide the most popular pension
    decumulation products, would suggest that the supply side substitutability of
    accumulation and decumulation products is at least limited to certain categories of
    providers.
30. For the purpose of this case, the question as to whether accumulation and
    decumulation products form separate product markets within the pensions market
    can, in any event, be left open, as the Transaction does not significantly impede
    effective competition on the market for pension products under any plausible market
    definitions based on the potential distinction between accumulation and
    decumulation products.
    Fixed annuities versus variable annuities
31. The introduction of variable annuities also raises the question as to whether fixed
    and variable annuities are part of the same product market for DC decumulation
    products, or whether they each form separate product markets.
32. A customer who buys a fixed annuity is guaranteed a certain regular pension for the
    rest of their life. The most commonly purchased type of product in the Netherlands
    is an immediately effective life annuity (direct ingaande pensioen, DIP).
33. As of 2016, members of DC schemes can also use their capital to purchase a
    variable annuity product, doorbeleggen. Unlike a fixed annuity, a variable annuity
    offers no guaranteed level of benefits, but the product is converted into a fixed
    annuity, usually when the policyholder reaches the age of 85. A number of
    providers have already introduced such products and others are in the process of
                                                7

    doing so, meaning that customers will now be able to choose between fixed and
    variable annuities.
34. From a customer’s perspective, the choice between a fixed and a variable annuity is
    largely a question of propensity for risk-taking. Depending on how markets develop,
    customers may be better off with a variable annuity, but could equally be worse off.
    Some customers may therefore prefer to purchase a fixed annuity to have the
    certainty of a guaranteed level of income for the duration of their retirement.
35. The Notifying Party contends that fixed and variable annuities form part of the same
    market. It argues that they are substitutable from a demand-side point of view, as
    they both provide an income stream during retirement, and it could not be said that
    one will perform consistently better than the other.
36. The Notifying Party further points out that the expertise required to offer a variable
    annuity is generally very similar to that needed for fixed annuities. The main
    exception is investment expertise, which is more important for variable annuities. In
    the Notifying Party’s view, any provider, such as a PPI, which did not have such
    expertise in-house, could in any case make use of external consultants or investment
    managers.
37. Nonetheless, the difference in risk level between variable and fixed annuities
    suggests that they may not be entirely substitutable for all consumers. Furthermore,
    even if a provider of fixed annuities could easily start offering variable annuities,
    this does not necessarily indicate that the reverse is true. The possible range of
    providers of fixed annuities is more limited than that of variable annuities, due to
    the requirement to hold certain levels of capital and to be licensed to insure the
    implicit risk in a fixed annuity.
38. The results of the market investigation were not conclusive as to whether fixed and
    variable annuities should be considered as part of the same or as separate product
    markets. Variable annuities have only been sold since very recently and many
    market participants felt it was too early to express a definite opinion on the extent to
    which they will represent a genuine alternative for customers. From a supply side
    point of view, the competitors in response to the market investigation suggested that
    most major insurers have or will soon introduce variable annuities17. The
    competitors also suggested that all pension providers will be capable of offering
    variable annuities should they choose to do so.18 In terms of the product
    characteristics, however, competitors confirmed that fixed and variable annuities
    have quite different features: whilst fixed annuities offer certainty, variable
    annuities offer the chance of a higher return, but with an element of risk.19
    Competitors’ views on the extent to which variable annuities constitute an
    alternative to fixed annuities were mixed, but in general they seemed to think that
    variable annuities could be attractive to customers, but only if the variable annuity is
17  Q9 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors: Most insurance companies offer fixed and variable annuity
    products.
18  Variable annuities imply less risk for an insurer than fixed annuities, meaning that an insurer with the
    capital necessary to offer fixed annuities can, at least from this perspective, easily offer variable
    annuities. The results of the market investigation did not reveal any other barriers to introducing
    fixed annuities, suggesting that, were an insurer to choose not to offer fixed annuities, this would be a
    strategic choice.
19  Q36 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                         8

    an additional pension (i.e. on top of a DB pension) or if the customer can choose an
    annuity which combines a fixed and a variable element.20 This suggests that, in
    some circumstances, customers may not see variable annuities as a real alternative
    to fixed annuities, but rather a complementary product. The responses of some
    competitors and pension product distributors also suggested that variable annuities
    may only ever be popular amongst a small group of customers, typically the higher
    educated employees who understand variable annuities and can afford to take this
    type of risk.21
39. Competitors’ responses further suggested that the current low interest rates are
    likely to make variable annuities more attractive to customers, because there is a
    chance that the value of the annuity will increase if interest rates rise in the future.
    Conversely, a customer choosing a fixed annuity would be locked in to a low rate.
40. For the purpose of present assessment, the question as to whether fixed and variable
    annuities form separate product markets within a hypothetical decumulation market
    can, in any event, be left open, as the Transaction does not significantly impede
    effective competition on the market for pension products under any plausible market
    definitions based on the potential distinction between fixed and variable annuities.
       III.2.A.2 Individual life insurance
41. In previous cases the Commission has considered the existence of a hypothetical
    market for pure protection products.22 These are products where, in return for a
    regular premium, the insurer agrees to pay a lump sum on a certain specified event
    such as death or serious illness. These products do not include any investment
    element. Pure protection policies may include mortgage protection policies, term-
    life insurance (i.e. protection for a defined period, where the policyholder chooses
    the cash sum they wish to save for to cover their families in the event of death or the
    expiration of the policy), whole life policies (which pay on death of the insured) and
    critical illness cover.23
42. Within the category of pure protection products, there are several different types of
    products that are not substitutable from a demand side perspective. In the past, the
    Commission has, however, also noted that there were indications of a degree of
    supply-side substitutability between certain pure risk protection products. Therefore,
    in a recent case the Commission has left it open whether pure protection products
    constitute one product market, or whether this market should be segmented
    according to various risks covered.24
43. In previous cases the Commission has also considered the existence of a
    hypothetical market for savings and investment products.25 This market
    encompasses life insurance products with an investment element, which therefore
    serve the purpose of wealth accumulation. Any protection product that would have
20  Q37 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
21  Q9 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products and Q36 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
22  See COMP/M.7478 Aviva/Friends Life/Tenet, COMP/M.6521 Talanx International Meiji Yasuda
    Life insurance/Warta, COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance business.
23  See COMP/M.7478 Aviva/Friends Life/Tenet, COMP/M.6883 Canada Life/Irish Life.
24  See COMP/M.7478 Aviva/Friends Life/Tenet.
25  See COMP/M.7478 Aviva/Friends Life/Tenet, COMP/M.6883 Canada Life/Irish Life.
                                                       9

    an investment element was not considered a “pure” protection product and would
    thus be part of “savings and investments” products. These include: tracker funds
    (where the investment return over a specified period is based on the performance of
    one or more stock market indexes), guaranteed funds (which provide a guaranteed
    return over a specified period), managed funds (pooled funds investing in a mix of
    assets such as equities, securities and property), personal investment plans and
    personal equity plans. In general, the products within this category differ in relation
    to the mechanism used to generate returns.
    Pure protection products
44. The Notifying Party argues that the types of insurance policies available in the
    Netherlands do not fit naturally into a segmentation between pure protection and
    savings and investment, as the same products can be bought for different purposes
    by different customers.
45. However, contrary to the Notifying Party’s suggestions, the replies to the market
    investigation did not provide any evidence which would suggest that in the present
    case the Commission should depart from the past practice and include pure
    protection products and savings and investment products in one product market. The
    Commission notes that the types of products that make up the vast majority of sales
    of pure protection products in the Netherlands – funeral insurance and term-life
    insurance – are sold to protect against very specific risks (term-life insurance being
    used to cover the cost of, most often, repaying a mortgage, or sometimes rental
    payments or the cost of living of the family after the death of the insured party) and
    these products do not include investment elements. Conversely, savings and
    investment products sold in the Netherlands are fiscally incentivised products
    through which the policyholder saves up to purchase an annuity on retirement. This
    annuity then provides an additional retirement income. It is thus clear that in general
    pure protection and savings and investment products serve different needs.
46. Furthermore, within pure protection products, one could distinguish separate
    markets based on the distinct risks they cover, namely for term-life insurance and
    for funeral insurance. For the purpose of this case, only the market for term-life
    insurance needs to be considered, as both Parties have ceased offering funeral
    insurance.
47. In view of the above, as regards pure protection products, for the purpose of this
    case, the Commission will assess the impact of the Transaction, on plausible
    relevant product markets comprising either all pure protection products or
    specifically term-life and funeral insurance products. The question as to whether
    term-life products do form a separate market within pure protection products can, in
    any event, be left open, as the Transaction does not significantly impede effective
    competition under either approach.
    Savings and investment products
48. The savings and investment products available in the Netherlands are all designed as
    a way of saving for extra retirement income (in addition to an individual’s pillar 2
    pension). Some include the savings phase and the payment out of retirement
    benefits in one product, whilst others only comprise the savings phase, but include
    an obligation to purchase an annuity at the end of a fixed period. Some savings and
    investment products also include a term-life component, i.e. a benefit which is fixed.
                                              10

    These policies are therefore usually non-unit-linked, whereas all other savings and
    investment products are unit-linked.
49. Savings and investment life insurance products have declined sharply in popularity
    in the Netherlands in recent years, in particular due to misselling of unit-linked
    policies during the period 1990 to 2008.26. The negative connotations since
    associated with these products have led most insurance companies to cease offering
    them to new customers. Business for unit-linked savings and investment products is
    therefore largely limited to servicing of existing policies.
50. The market investigation revealed that traditionally savings and investment products
    are increasingly being replaced by a new type of savings product, banksparen,
    which were introduced in 2008 and are provided under a banking licence. Similarly
    to traditional savings and investment products, banksparen also benefit from
    favourable tax treatment as pillar 3 products27 and are purchased in order to save up
    for buying an annuity on retirement, which then supplements the individual’s pillar
    2 pension income. 28
51. The question therefore also arises as to whether traditional savings and investment
    products provided within life insurance and banksparen do form part of the same
    market.29
52. The range of traditional life insurance products includes both products for saving to
    provide income in retirement, (e.g. deferred annuities, lijfrente uitgesteld) and
    annuities (most often an immediately effective annuity, direct ingaande lijfrente)
    which are purchased on retirement. Banksparen is based on the same concept, with
    products being available for the savings phase and for payment out during
    retirement in the form of annuities. Banksparen could therefore be considered to
    mirror traditional savings and investment products in terms of the structure of the
    product range.
53. On the other hand, banksparen differ from traditional life insurance policies in a
    number of ways, most importantly: i) the annuity part of banksparen is of a fixed
    duration (usually up to a maximum of 30 years after retirement age), meaning that
26  The affair came to light in 2006 and was the subject of ongoing media attention for a number of
    years, coming to be known as the woekerpolisaffaire (‘profiteering policies affair’). The scandal
    related to a particular product known as beleggingsverzekering (a unit-linked savings and investment
    insurance product), which represented the majority of life insurers’ business in this area
27  Under the classification by pension ‘pillars’, pillar 1 is understood to mean the state pension system,
    pillar 2 employer-based pensions to which both the employee and employer contribute, and pillar 3
    voluntary retirement savings funded by the individual.
28  Banksparen can be used for three specific purposes: as retirement income, to repay a mortgage and to
    save using the compensation received as a result of termination of an employment contract. Tax
    advantages are now only available for new customers for retirement savings but customers who had
    already acquired banksparen for mortgage savings or to save a severance payment prior to the
    changes in legislation can continue to benefit from tax benefits.
29  A further consideration here is the categorisation of the annuities which have historically been
    bought using the capital saved up within traditional savings and investment products (direct ingaande
    lijfrente, DIL). The Notifying Party does not consider DIL to form part of the market for savings and
    investment products and treats them as a separate product category of their own. Whilst this may be
    accurate, insofar as the product is not strictly a savings product, it is important to note the link with
    savings and investment products, as many savings and investment products include the obligation to
    purchase an annuity.
                                                         11

    the insurer does not bear longevity risk, ii) should the provider go bankrupt, capital
    is only covered up to EUR 100 000 for banksparen (whereas the full amount is
    recoverable under an insured policy), and iii) should the policyholder die before the
    end of the policy, the policy will be paid out to his/her inheritors, which is not the
    case for life insurance.
54. Sales of banksparen have grown rapidly since their introduction in 2008, and if
    considered as part of the individual life insurance market, currently represent over
    75% of new business. Both NN and Delta Lloyd offer banksparen through their
    banking subsidiaries, as do most of the other main insurers. NN stopped offering its
    single premium immediate annuity product in January 2017, and the Notifying Party
    explains that this is in part due to the fact that this product had been marginalised by
    banksparen. It would appear that insurers in general are accepting that the
    traditional life insurance market is shrinking (at least insofar as concerns savings
    and investment products and annuities) and they are therefore devoting their efforts
    to winning market share in banksparen, to compensate for the lost revenue in
    individual life insurance.30 It could thus be argued that business is simply shifting
    from individual life insurance to banksparen, with the two types of product
    fulfilling the same customer need.
55. In view of the above, the Commission considers that there are strong arguments to
    consider that banksparen form part of the market for savings and investment
    individual life insurance products.
56. The Notifying Party argues that any hypothetical market combining traditional life
    insurance products and banksparen is not a meaningful product market. The basis
    for this claim seems, however, to be more based on internal record-keeping (i.e. the
    fact that revenue for the two classes of products is recorded and assessed
    differently) than on any consideration of supply- or demand-side substitutability.
57. The results of the market investigation generally confirmed that market participants
    see banksparen as a direct substitute for some life insurance products. One
    competitor stated that banksparen accounted for 70% of its sales of pillar 3 savings
    in 2013, and are now estimated to make up almost all sales. 31 The way in which
    competitors describe the changes in the overall size of the market show that they
    automatically view banksparen as being within the same market.32
58. Responses to the market investigation confirmed that sales of traditional annuities
    have declined rapidly due to the introduction of banksparen, which are generally
    preferred by customers as they are seen as more transparent and easier to
    understand.33 One distributor commented that traditional annuities are only sold to
30  DNB, Visie op de toekomst van de Nederlandse verzekeringssector, December 2016,
    http://www.dnb.nl/binaries/DNBrapport%20Visie%20op%20de%20toekomst%20van%20de%20ver
    zekringssector,%2013%20december%202016_tcm46-350191.pdf?2016121317.
31  Q82 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
32  Q85 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors. Since the introduction of Banksparen in 2008 the total market
    production increased, despite the strong decline in Individual Life. However in 2013 fiscal benefits
    on Banksparen were limited which led to a decrease in total market production.
33  Q85 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                      12

    customers for which banksparen for regulatory reasons are either not available or
    unattractive (i.e. for customers who purchased products under the ‘old regime‘34).35
59.  Other comments on the introduction of banksparen also show that competitors
    consider them as an almost exact equivalent. One competitor stated for example that
    “since 2008 banks have been allowed to offer deferred and immediately effective
    annuities and annuity insurance. Before that this business was exclusively reserved
    for insurance companies”.36
60. When discussing the needs served by the products, a number of competitors also
    refer to banksparen and life insurance products (in particular annuities and deferred
    pensions) as being equivalent.37 The vast majority of competitors confirmed that
    they consider banksparen to be competing with traditional life insurance policies. A
    number of respondents also commented that banksparen are preferred by customers
    as the products are perceived to be safe and transparent.38
61. Competitors also point out that, in addition to serving the same fundamental
    customer need, banksparen also benefit from the same tax treatment as life
    insurance products. Furthermore, the savings accumulated in a banksparen product
    are not available for the customer to use at any point they choose, but instead they
    have to wait until the maturity date of the product. This again is a parallel with
    insurance products.39
62. In conclusion therefore, the Commission notes that banksparen seem to share the
    same fundamental characteristics and serve the same purpose as savings and
    investment products provided within individual life insurance, even if there are also
    some differences in the products.
63. Irrespective of whether banksparen should be considered to form one product
    market together with traditional insurer’s savings and investment products or not,
    taking into account the purpose for which the different products are bought, it would
    appear logical to distinguish within the savings and investment products
    accumulation products and decumulation products. The reasons for that distinction
    would be similar to those described above in the context of group pension products.
64. In any event for the purpose of this case, the questions as to whether banksparen
    forms part of the savings and investment products life insurance market and whether
    the market should be segmented into accumulation and decumulation products can
34  In the context of Dutch individual life insurance, ‘old regime’ life insurance policies are policies
    taken out before 16 October 1990 (or before 1 January 1992 if the policy was bought via a single
    premium payment). An individual who has an ‘old regime’ life insurance policy can technically still
    purchase a banksparen annuity product, but they would then be subject to the tax rules of the new
    regime, and would lose some of the flexibility allowed under the old regime, such as the possibility
    to pay out the annuity as a lump sum or transfer it to someone else.
35  Q10.1 of Questionnaire 4 to distributors of individual life and non-life insurance.
36  Q82.2 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
37  Q84 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors. Banksparen is a direct alternative to 3rd pillar life-
    insurance. Banksparen serve the same needs to build-up capital with some tax advantage, but is
    more cost efficient.
    Banksparen, deferred pensions and deferred annuities serve similar needs
    Lijfrenteverzekering and direct ingaande lijfrente are our only two alternatives for banksparen.
38  Q85 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
39  Q86.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                        13

    be left open, as the Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition
    on these markets under any plausible market definitions resulting from these
    distinctions.
    Annuities (pillar 2 and pillar 3)
65. One area in which there may be a more blurred division between product markets
    than was previously identified by the Commission is in annuities. Insurers sell
    annuities both for the decumulation phase of DC pension schemes (i.e. as part of the
    pillar 2 pension system) and to individuals who have saved up through individual
    savings and investment products. As with the savings products themselves, the
    annuity purchased can either be in the traditional life insurance product range, or
    from the new bank savings products (banksparen), the main difference being that
    the latter are always time limited (to a maximum of 30 years), whereas the former
    pay out for the insured party’s full lifetime.
66. From a demand-side perspective, there is no substitutability between pillar 2 and
    pillar 3 annuities, as regulations prevent customers from using capital saved in one
    pillar to buy an annuity in the other.
67. From a supply-side perspective, however, the products are very similar, as both
    annuities purchased within DC pension schemes and those purchased within
    individual life insurance involve the provider taking on interest rate and longevity
    risk. This is less the case for bank annuities, as these are for a fixed term and
    therefore do not imply any longevity risk. Furthermore, bank annuities are provided
    under a banking licence, meaning that, even if insurers provide these, this would be
    through their banking subsidiaries.
68. The Notifying Party acknowledges that any insurance company offering pillar 2
    decumulation products could easily offer pillar 3 decumulation products, and most,
    in practice, already do. It argues, however, on the grounds of the lack of demand-
    side substitutability, that there should not be considered to be one market
    comprising pillar 2 and pillar 3 decumulation products.
69. The results of the market investigation were inconclusive as to whether pillar 2 and
    pillar 3 annuities could form part of the same market due to supply-side
    substitutability. As mentioned above, the market investigation did, however,
    confirm that an increasingly large proportion of pillar 3 savings and investment
    products sold in the Netherlands are banking products, which would limit the
    supply-side substitutability.
70. For the purpose of this case, the question as to whether pillar 2 and pillar 3 annuities
    form separate product markets within a hypothetical decumulation market can, in
    any event, be left open, as the Transaction does not significantly impede effective
    competition in the area of annuities, irrespective of whether annuities under pillar 2
    and pillar 3 are considered to form separate product markets, or to be part of one
    distinct product market.
    Conclusion
71. The market investigation confirmed that the market for life insurance products can
    be segmented into the following three categories: (i) pension products, (ii) pure
    protection products, and (ii) savings and investment products. Whether or not a
    further segmentation is made between group and individual products is ultimately
                                                14

    inconsequential, as the first category, pension products, only exists as group
    products in the Netherlands, while the other two categories only exist as individual
    products. The market investigation strongly suggested that it would also be
    appropriate to make a distinction between defined benefit (DB) and defined
    contribution (DC) pension products, and, within DC pensions, potentially between
    unit-linked and non-unit-linked products or between accumulation and
    decumulation products. Within decumulation products, there may also be separate
    markets for variable and fixed annuities, whilst pillar 2 and pillar 3 annuities may
    form part of the same product market. As regards pure protection products the
    Commission will consider overall market comprising all such products and possible
    segmentation based on categories of risks covered such as term-life insurance or
    funeral insurance. As regards savings and investment products, the Commission will
    consider overall market comprising all these products, including banksparen or not,
    and potentially segmented into accumulation and decumulation products. For the
    purpose of this case, the market definition can, in any event, be left open, as the
    Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition under any of these
    market definitions.
       III.2.B. Non-life insurance
72. In past decisions, the Commission observed that, from a demand-side perspective,
    the market for non-life insurance could be segmented into as many product markets
    as there are different types of risks insured and that, from a supply-side perspective,
    the conditions for insurance of the different types of risks are quite similar and most
    large non-life insurers are active in several types of risk coverage.40
73. The Commission usually considers a distinction between: (i) accident and sickness,
    (ii) motor vehicle, (iii) property, (iv) liability, (v) marine, aviation and transport
    (MAT), (vi) credit and suretyship and (vii) travel insurance41 but has to date left the
    exact market definition for non-life insurance products open. The Commission has
    also considered several alternative hypothetical segmentations for the non-life
    insurance market, distinguishing for instance fire insurance42 or legal assistance43. In
    certain decisions, the Commission also considered separate product markets
    according to the applicable national insurance classification.44 A further distinction
    could also be made between individual and group customers.
74. The Notifying Party considers the relevant market to be the overall market for non-
    life insurance.
75. The results of the market investigation show that insurers typically make a
    distinction between property and casualty insurance on the one hand, and group
    disability and sick leave on the other (with health insurance also potentially within
    the latter category, but outside the scope of this case as there is no overlap between
40  See COMP/M.7233 Allianz/Going concern of Unipolsai Assicurazioni, COMP/M.IF
    P&C/TopDanmark.
41  See COMP/M.6521 Talanx International/Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance/Warta, para 19;
    COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance Business, para. 22; and COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur,
    para. 14.
42  See COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABN Amro Assets, Commission 3 October 2007, para. 72
43  See COMP/M.7233 Allianz/Going concern of Unipolsai Assicurazioni.
44  See COMP/M.1712, Generali / INA, paras. 9 et seq.; and COMP/M.6649, Allianz / Insurance
    Portfolio and Brokerage Services of Gan Eurocourtage, para. 11.
                                                   15

    the Parties’ activities in this area). The large insurers typically offer products across
    both these broad categories, but many smaller companies are more specialised,
    offering only, for example, property and casualty insurance, or only insurance to
    commercial clients (and not to individuals). In general, the market investigation did
    not provide any evidence to justify departing from the past Commission practice of
    considering separate markets for the various insurance products insuring different
    risks.
76. For the purpose of this case, the product market definition can, in any event, be left
    open, as the Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition with
    respect to non-life insurance, irrespective of whether products insuring different
    risks (e.g. travel insurance, disability insurance etc.) are considered to each form a
    separate product market or to together form one broader market, and irrespective of
    whether non-life insurance for groups and for individuals are considered to form one
    or separate product markets.
77. As regards the geographic market definition, in previous decisions relating to non-
    life insurance the Commission considered that the markets are likely to be national
    with the exception of certain segments, such as insurance for large commercial,
    industrial or environmental risks, marine, aviation and transport insurance or
    aerospace insurance, which are likely to be wider than national for large group
    customers.45 Neither of the Parties provides insurance in these segments. For the
    purpose of this case, the non-life insurance market can therefore be considered to be
    national.
     III.2.C. Pensions administration
78. In a previous case, the Commission considered that there exist separate product
    markets for retirement benefits consulting and pensions administration.46 Pensions
    administration was defined as providing of facilities to allow scheme members to
    access their fund balances and to perform certain operations via, for example,
    websites.
79. The Commission considered that the geographic market for pensions administration
    could be national, as the nature of pensions administration systems is determined to
    a large extent by national regulatory frameworks and other national legislation, e.g.
    on social security and tax. The Commission considered also that the market could
    have some international characteristics. Ultimately the exact geographic market
    definition was left open.47
80. The Notifying Party does not contend the Commission’s past practice, nor propose
    any alternative segmentation. The market investigation similarly did not present any
    reason to depart from past practice.
81. In any event, for the purpose of this case, the market definition can be left open, as
    the Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition under any
    plausible market definitions mentioned above.
45  See    COMP/M.5010          Berkshire Hathaway/Munich Re/GAUM,     COMP/M.6217     Bâloise
    Holding/Nateus/Nateus Life.
46  See COMP/M.5597 Towers Perrin/Watson Wyatt, para 10-13,
47  See COMP/M.5597 Towers Perrin/Watson Wyatt, para 14-17.
                                                   16

     III.2.D. Provision of insurance to pension funds
82. A market limited to the provision of insurance to pension funds has not previously
    been considered by the Commission, while it would appear to be relevant in this
    case.
83. Dutch pension funds48 typically source a range of services from external providers,
    either, as is the case for insurance, because they are not licensed to perform the
    activity themselves, or, because they do not have the necessary expertise in-house.
    The main services they require are asset management, fiduciary management,
    pensions administration and insurance.
84. There have historically been a number of different types of insurance scheme used
    for outsourcing risk from pension funds. These vary in terms of, firstly, whether the
    whole pension contract is insured, or only specific risks (e.g. mortality or disability
    risk), and, secondly, in terms of the length of the contract – whether it is for a fixed
    or an indefinite period. Legislation introduced in 2012 in the Netherlands means that
    schemes insuring mortality and disability risks for a specific period can no longer be
    offered, but the other types of contract are still used. 49
85. The relevant geographic market for the provision of insurance to pension funds
    would appear to be national, due to the presence of national legislation related to for
    example eligibility of various suppliers to provide certain categories of pension
    products (e.g. DB or DC schemes, decumulation products), existence of mandatory
    industry pension schemes or even to licensing of distributors and the procedures for
    carrying out tenders. Furthermore, the market appears to be national in scope due to
    the importance of expertise in assessing risks related to pension funds, which is
    necessary for the correct pricing of insurance offered. In addition, national providers
    account for at least 95% of the market, which would appear to confirm this
    hypothesis. The Notifying Party, however, contends that certain types of insurance
    (in particular for longevity risk) can be sourced on an international market. Whilst
    this may be true, this particular type of insurance would appear to represent a very
    minimal part of the insurance sourced by Dutch pension funds.
86. For the purpose of this case, the market definition can, in any event, be left open, as
    the Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition, irrespective of
    whether the market for providing insurance to pension funds is considered to be a
    distinct product market, or to form part of the wider market for all insurance
    services and irrespective of whether the market is national or wider in scope.
       III.2.E. Buy-outs
87. Buy-outs of pension schemes have traditionally been the main way for a pension
    fund to transfer its liabilities to an insurer. When a company or other provider of a
    pension fund is either no longer able or no longer wishes to bear the longevity and
    investment risk associated with the pension fund, it can choose to transfer the
    obligations to an insurer.
48  Industry pension funds (BPFs) and company pension funds (OPFs).
49  Pension Act 2012, Article 148a and Article 220a paragraph 1.
                                                     17

88. In previous cases, when considering the market for buy-outs, the Commission
    identified two main types of de-risking transactions which take place in relation to
    DB pension schemes: i) longevity swaps, whereby a pension scheme can hedge the
    longevity risk, and ii) bulk annuity contracts, whereby all the risk associated with
    the pension liabilities is transferred.50 Within bulk annuity contracts a further
    distinction has been considered between buy-in and buy-out transactions. Under a
    buy-in transaction, the ultimate liability for the benefit payments remains with the
    pension scheme trustees, who hold the policy as an asset and remain responsible for
    paying the pensions. Under a buy-out transaction, meanwhile, the assets and
    liabilities of the entire scheme are transferred to the insurer.
89. The Commission concluded that longevity swaps and bulk annuity contracts should
    be considered to constitute distinct product markets, but left the question open as to
    whether there are separate markets for buy-in and buy-out transactions (within bulk
    annuity contracts).51
90. The Notifying Party submits that it is not aware of any buy-ins having taken place
    on the Dutch pensions market. The relevant market for the purpose of this case
    would therefore comprise the market for bulk annuity contracts, potentially limited
    to buy-out transactions.
91. In previous cases the Commission considered that the market for bulk annuity
    contracts is national in scope.52 The Notifying Party does not challenge this
    assumption and the market investigation also did not provide any grounds to
    consider other possible geographic market definitions.
92. For the purpose of this case, the market definition can, in any event, be left open, as
    the Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition with respect to
    buy-outs, irrespective of whether buy-outs are considered to form a distinct market,
    to be part of a market for bulk annuity contracts or to be part of a wider market for
    de-risking transactions (including both bulk annuity transfers and longevity swaps).
     III.2.F. Insurance distribution
93. In previous cases, the Commission has considered the existence of a downstream
    market for insurance distribution that involves the procurement of insurance cover
    for individuals and group customers (i.e. companies), through any one of a number
    of possible channels, including direct sales, tied agents and intermediaries such as
    brokers and banks.53
94. The Commission has discussed whether the market for insurance distribution
    comprises only outward distribution channels (i.e. non-owned and third party
    distributors such as brokers and agents) or whether it should also be considered to
    include the sales force and office networks of the insurer (i.e. direct sales). This
    question has, however, always been left open.54
50  See COMP/M.7204 Rothesay Life/Metlife Assurance.
51  See COMP/M.7204 Rothesay Life/Metlife Assurance.
52  See COMP/M.7204 Rothesay Life/Metlife Assurance.
53  See COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur, COMP/M.6957 IF P&C/Topdanmark.
54  See COMP/M.6957 IF P&C/Topdanmark, COMP/M.6053 CVC/Apollo/Brit Insurance.
                                                 18

95. The Commission has also considered whether a distinction could be made between
    the distribution of life and non-life products due to differences in the regulatory
    regimes and the fact that different actors are involved in the distribution of life and
    non-life insurance. Again, this question has always been left open.55
96. The information provided by the Notifying Party demonstrate that in the
    Netherlands the distribution channels for pension products are entirely distinct from
    those for (individual) life and non-life insurance, as only intermediaries holding a
    specific regulatory licence are able to distribute pension products to companies.
    These are usually actuarial or other consulting firms. No direct distribution takes
    place for pension products. The market for the distribution of pension products
    would consequently be restricted to outward channels, as 100% of pension products
    are distributed via intermediaries. It is, however, possible for an insurer to be
    present on this market via a subsidiary that has the required licence, as is the case
    for NN and its wholly owned subsidiary Zicht B.V. (Zicht).
97. Life and non-life insurance products, meanwhile, can be distributed via banks,
    brokers and other intermediaries, as well as via direct sales. The specific
    intermediaries involved in the distribution of life and non-life insurance respectively
    also vary to some extent. Whilst banks and brokers operating via online platforms
    typically offer both life and non-life insurance, more specialised intermediaries also
    play an important role on the distribution market. These include intermediaries who
    advise individual clients on the purchase of annuities and also risk consulting firms,
    which typically advise businesses on non-life insurance. In terms of the actors
    present on the market, there is therefore some differentiation according to both the
    type of the policy (life or non-life) and the customer (group or individual).
    Nonetheless, there is not the same regulatory restriction for distribution of these
    products as applies for pension products.
98. In view of the above, the Commission considers that it is likely that there is a
    separate product market for the distribution of pension products. There may also be
    separate markets for the distribution of group non-life insurance (in part as this is
    very often sold together with pensions) and for the distribution of individual life
    insurance, although this is less certain. Furthermore, a hypothetical market for the
    distribution of pension products would be de facto restricted to outward channels, as
    mentioned above.56 The hypothetical markets for the distribution of life and non-life
    insurance respectively could include only outward distribution channels, or could
    include both outward and inward channels, as contemplated in the previous
    decisions of the Commission.
99. The Commission has always left the geographic market definition of insurance
    distribution open, while recognising the national nature of insurance distribution
    channels.57
55  See COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur, COMP/M.6957 IF P&C/Topdanmark.
56  It is, however, possible for an insurer to be present on the market for the distribution of pension
    products via a subsidiary that has the required licence, as is the case for NN and its subsidiary Zicht,
    as discussed in the competitive assessment.
57  See COMP/M.6957 IF P&C/Topdanmark, COMP/M.6053 CVC/Apollo/Brit Insurance.
                                                        19

100. The Notifying Party considers the Dutch insurance industry and its further product
     segments to constitute national geographic markets, including for insurance
     distribution.
101. The presence of extensive national regulation on distribution of different types of
     insurance product in the Netherlands would seem to support the assumption that
     distribution is a national market. The market investigation did not provide any
     evidence to the contrary.
102. For the purpose of this case, the product market definition can, in any event, be left
     open, as the Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition in the
     area of insurance distribution, irrespective of whether the insurance distribution
     market is considered to constitute one broad market, or whether separate product
     markets are envisaged for the distribution of different types of insurance, according
     to the type of insurance and/or the type of customer.
        III.2.G. Reinsurance
103. Reinsurance consists in providing insurance cover to another insurer for some or all
     of the liabilities assumed under its insurance policies, in order to transfer risk from
     the insurer to the reinsurer.58
104. In previous decisions, the Commission distinguished the market for reinsurance
     from those for life insurance and non-life insurance, defining reinsurance services as
     the provision of insurance cover to another party for part or all of the liability
     assumed by it under an insurance policy it has issued.59 It left open, however,
     whether a further distinction should be made between reinsurance for the life and
     non-life segments respectively, and whether, within the non-life segment, further
     segmentation according to the class of risk should be considered.60
105. The Commission has previously considered the market for reinsurance to be global
     due to the need to pool risks on a worldwide basis.61
106. The Notifying Party does not propose any alternative product or geographic
     markets. The market investigation similarly did not present any reason to depart
     from past practice.
107. For the purpose of this case, the product market definition can, in any event, be left
     open, as the Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition in the
     area of reinsurance, irrespective of whether the reinsurance market is considered to
     form one product market, or whether reinsurance for life and non-life insurance or
     for different risks are considered to constitute separate markets.
      III.2.H. Asset management
108. In past cases, the Commission has described asset management as the provision and
     potential implementation of investment advice. It was considered that it may also
58   See COMP/M.6743 – Talanx International/Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance Company/HDI Poland.
59   See COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur.
60   See COMP/M.6053 CVC/Apollo/Brit Insurance, COMP/M.5083 Groupama/OTP/Garancia.
61   See COMP/M.6848 Aegon/Santander/Santander Vida/Santander Generales, COMP/M.5925
     Metlife/Alico/Delam.
                                                  20

     include the creation and managing of mutual funds which are then marketed on an
     “off-the-shelf” basis, including to retail customers, the provision of portfolio
     management services to institutional investors (pension funds, institutions and
     international organisations), and the provision of custody services related to asset
     management.
109. The Commission considered the possibility of there being a relevant product market
     for asset management, which would include the creation and management of mutual
     funds for retail clients and tailor-made funds for corporate and institutional
     customers, and portfolio management for private investors, pension funds and
     institutions.62
110. The Commission further considered the possible existence of separate relevant
     product markets for each of the types of products mentioned above. 63 In previous
     cases, the Commission has judged that asset management services for private
     individuals should be considered to be distinct from other asset management
     services (as they often form part of retail banking).64 With regard to the other
     potential narrower markets within asset management (such as a market for custody
     services), the Commission has, however, always left the market definition open.65
111. The Notifying Party does not propose any alternative product markets and the
     market investigation did not suggest that there would be any reason to depart from
     past practice.
112. The relevant geographic market for asset management (or any narrower hypothetical
     market within asset management) has previously been considered to be either
     national or EEA wide.66 The Commission has deemed it likely that at least some
     parts of the asset management market are wider than national, in particular as
     regards institutional clients.67
113. The Notifying Party considers the market for asset management to be at least EEA-
     wide, on the basis that competition between financial institutions that offer asset
     management takes place at a wider than national level.
114. The market investigation did not provide conclusive evidence as to whether the
     market for asset management should be considered to be national or EEA wide.
115. For the purpose of this case, the market definition can, in any event, be left open, as
     the Transaction does not significantly impede effective competition on the market
     for asset management under any plausible market definition as previously
     considered by the Commission.
62   See COMP/M.6812 SFPI/Dexia, COMP/M.3894 Unicredito/HVB.
63   See COMP/M.6812 SFPI/Dexia, COMP/M.5728 Credit Agricole/Societe Generale Asset
     Management.
64   See COMP/M.4844 Fortis/ABN Amro Assets, COMP/M.3894 Unicredito/HVB.
65   See COMP/M.6812 SFPI/Dexia, COMP/M.4844 Fortis/ABN Amro Assets.
66   See COMP/M.6812 SFPI/Dexia, COMP/M.4844 Fortis/ABN Amro Assets.
67   See COMP/M.5728 Credit Agricole/Societe Generale Asset Management, COMP/8359 Amundi/
     Credit Agricole/ Pioneer Investments.
                                               21

IV.   PENSION PROVIDERS IN THE NETHERLANDS
116. Further to the above section on market definition (section III) and by way of
     introduction to the competitive assessment (section I), the Commission considers it
     useful to provide a short and general description of the various types of pension
     product providers in the Netherlands. This background information will help to
     illustrate the Parties’ position as insurance companies vis-à-vis the other types of
     pension providers active in the Netherlands, which the Notifying Party believes to
     exert competitive pressure on the Parties. The following section also highlights the
     recent regulatory changes introduced in the Netherlands that have allowed new
     types of pension providers to enter the market.
IV.1. Introduction
117. The Dutch pensions market is characterised by the presence of a wide range of
     providers who serve, to some extent, different parts of the market. Insurers, such as
     NN and Delta Lloyd, between them account for no more than 14%68 of regular
     premiums paid into all Dutch pension schemes and funds. A large part of the Dutch
     pension market (i.e. pillar 2, the market for supplementary collective employer-
     based pensions) has traditionally been served by compulsory industry pension funds
     (bedrijfstakpensioenfonds,            BPFs)        and        company           pension         funds
     (ondernemingspensioenfonds, OPFs), which together account for around 85% of the
     premiums paid on the Dutch pensions market.
118. The 14% of the pensions market occupied by insurers is in the hands of six main
     players (in order of market share): Aegon, NN, Delta Lloyd, ASR, Vivat and
     Achmea.
119. The Dutch pensions market has seen a number of significant changes in recent
     years, some of which are typical of the current economic environment and can be
     seen as part of wider international trends, and others of which are more specific to
     the Netherlands. As in many other countries, the Netherlands is seeing a gradual
     shift from defined benefit (DB) to defined contribution (DC) pension schemes.
     Changing demographics have made it increasingly difficult to fund DB schemes,
     and in recent years this has been further exacerbated by persistent low interest rates.
     Changes more specific to the Netherlands include in particular the introduction of
     two new pension vehicles: premiepensioeninstellingen (PPIs) in 2011 and more
     recently algemeen pensioenfondsen (APFs) in 2016. Insurers such as NN and Delta
     Lloyd are both active as providers of these new types of pension arrangement, via
     their respective PPIs and APFs they have set up. In these areas however the Parties
     compete also with a wider field of competitors The Parties’ PPIs, for example, are
     competing not only with the PPIs set up by other insurance companies but also with
     PPIs set up by asset managers and banks. In addition, the number of company
     pension funds (OPFs) has decreased dramatically in recent years and is expected to
     fall further, primarily due to the difficulty of maintaining these schemes in the face
     of new stricter regulation on solvency and administration. These changes will be
     discussed in more detail in the sections which follow, in particular insofar as they
     have implications for the competitive assessment.
68   Assuming that PPIs (see section IV.6 for definition) are part of the insurers that set them up. If only
     insurers’ own business is taken into account, excluding PPIs, the actual percentage is even lower at
     approximately 12%.
                                                       22

120. The following sections provide a brief description of the different actors present on
     the Dutch pensions market, the products they offer and their typical customers.
IV.2. Bedrijfstakpensioenfondsen (BPFs)
121. BPFs are industry pension funds that serve a particular sector of the economy. The
     sectors covered by BPFs include, for example, construction, retail stores and health
     and welfare. There are currently 63 BPFs active in the Netherlands, which together
     account for around 64% of the Dutch pensions market.
122. BPFs were originally set up as a mandatory arrangement for certain industries, and
     employers for whom membership is obligatory and who still make up the vast
     majority of their membership (98% of premiums). Mandatory participation for an
     employer means that all individual employees are obliged to be members of the
     fund. All members of a BPF are subject to the same terms and conditions, meaning
     that they pay the same fixed level of contributions for the same level of benefits.
123. More recently, many BPFs have opened up their membership to other employers
     within their sector or in neighbouring sectors. These employers can join a BPF on
     the same terms and conditions as those for whom membership is mandatory.
124. There are also nine BPFs which have been set up on the basis of voluntary
     membership alone. These are also, however, sector specific, and include, for
     example, funds for the plastic and rubber industry, the dairy and related industry and
     public transport.
125. The vast majority of BPFs (over 99% based on 2015 regular premiums) operate
     defined benefit (DB) schemes. It follows that individual members of BPFs typically
     remain in the BPF during both the accumulation and the decumulation phase, i.e.
     their pension is paid out directly from the BPF, at the level set by the BPF’s terms
     and conditions at that point in time, and there is no possibility of shopping around
     for an annuity.
126. BPFs are regulated by the Dutch central bank (DNB), and are required to maintain
     certain minimum levels of coverage for their liabilities. Should a fund’s coverage
     ratio fall below the prescribed threshold, the board of the BPF is required to submit
     a recovery plan to the DNB, setting out how it will increase funding to the required
     level. This will normally involve increasing contributions, and, in more extreme
     cases, potentially also cutting pensions. Any decisions require the agreement of the
     representatives of the members, however, and it can therefore be difficult to obtain
     approval for such changes. Therefore, BPFs’ DB schemes are unlike those of
     insurers in that pension schemes offered by BPFs do not involve any guarantee
     element (other than pooling risk within the scheme and the scheme’s commitment to
     attempt to deliver the benefit as originally defined) whereas those offered by
     insurers guarantee the agreed levels of benefits (and these guarantees are backed
     with insurers capital, protected by solvency requirements).
127. Employers who join a BPF on a voluntary basis would typically transfer their
     historic assets and liabilities into the pension fund. These employers may have
     previously had a pension scheme with an insurer or may have had a company
     pension fund (OPF). As such, BPFs are one of the options open to OPFs which can
     no longer continue to operate independently.
                                                23

128. In order to join a BPF, the historic scheme being transferred in needs to meet certain
     requirements, and the employer is also required to agree to the terms and conditions
     of the BPF as they stand. In some cases this may mean that pension funds have to
     make an additional payment as a way of improving the coverage ratio of the assets
     and liabilities being transferred into the BPF.
129. Whilst OPFs (see section IV.4) that are struggling to survive often look to join a
     BPF, the smaller BPFs are also facing similar problems. Stricter capital
     requirements and increased regulation have made it increasingly difficult for smaller
     BPFs to operate in a cost-effective way, in particular due to higher administrative
     costs. This has led to a number of smaller BPFs merging.69
IV.3. Beroepspensioenfondsen (BrFs)
130. Beroepspensioenfondsen (BrFs) are pension funds that serve individuals in a
     number of specific professions, which are generally exercised independently, e.g.
     veterinarians and general practitioners. Participation in the BPF for their profession
     is usually mandatory for registered professionals. There are 11 BrFs in the
     Netherlands, each for a specific profession or sector, which together represent
     approximately 1.5% of the Dutch pensions market (measured on the basis of gross
     written premium (GWP) in 2015). The vast majority (90%, on the basis of 2015
     GWP)) of BrFs are DB schemes.
131. Contrary to insurers, pension schemes offered by BrFs cannot entail any guarantee
     element. For instance, DB pension benefits offered by BrFs can be reduced or no
     longer indexed if the scheme is underfunded and DC offered by BrFs schemes are
     necessarily unit-linked.
132. BrFs will not be discussed further in this decision as their activities can be
     considered to be totally distinct from those of other pension providers. Membership
     of the BrF is obligatory for the profession in question, and not open to any other
     firms or individuals, meaning that there can in no way be considered to be
     competition between BrFs and insurers, or any other pension provider.
IV.4. Ondernemingspensioenfondsen (OPFs)
133. OPFs are company pension funds set up by an individual employer for its
     employees. There are currently 293 OPFs70 active in the Netherlands, and it is
     typically large corporations which would choose to set up an OPF. Philips, Shell
     and KLM, for example, all have their own pension funds. OPFs account for around
     20% of the Dutch pensions market (based on GWP in 2015).
69 The difficulties faced by smaller BPFs were confirmed in particular during a call held with a BPF as
   part of the Commission’s market investigation.
70 There are also three multi-OPFs currently active the Netherlands. Multi-OPFs are legal entities which
   administer a number of pension funds. The funds are structured into circles, each with its own capital,
   in a similar way as is done in algemeen pensioenfondsen (APFs) – see section IV.7. Multi-OPFs could
   be considered to be the predecessor to APFs.
                                                      24

134. Similarly to BPFs, the vast majority of OPFs (97% based on GWP) operate as DB
     schemes. A minority of OPFs (3%) operate DC schemes.71
135. Contrary to insurers, products offered by OPFs do not involve any guarantee
     element (other than pooling risk within the scheme and the scheme’s commitment to
     attempt to deliver the benefit as originally defined) whereas products offered by
     insurers guarantee the agreed levels of benefits (and these guarantees are backed
     with insurers capital, protected by solvency requirements). DC schemes offered by
     OPFs are necessarily unit-linked.
136. In recent years, there has been significant consolidation amongst OPFs, affecting in
     particular the smaller funds. Stricter regulations on solvency and capital
     requirements, together with low interest rates on government bonds and
     demographic developments, have made it increasingly difficult for small OPFs to
     continue to operate independently, as was confirmed by OPFs contacted during the
     market investigation. In addition, regulation on the management of OPFs has
     become more onerous, requiring considerably more monitoring and reporting. For
     small OPFs that do not have the expertise necessary to meet these requirements in
     house, it has become very difficult to absorb these increased operating costs. Many
     OPFs have therefore either merged, or closed and transferred their historic assets
     and liabilities to another provider. OPFs in this situation are most often either
     bought out by an insurer (see sections III.2.E andV.1.F on buy-outs), with which
     they may then also enter into a contract for future accrual, or join a BPF, into which
     they also transfer their historic assets and liabilities. Since the launch of algemeen
     pensioenfondsen (APFs) (see section IV.7 below) in January 2016, OPFs have
     another alternative, as they can either join an existing APF or set up their own APF.
137. The different options available to an OPF have different implications for the
     scheme’s members: a buy-out by an insurer means that the members are then
     guaranteed a fixed level of pension benefit, whereas under an APF or a BPF, the
     benefits could be cut (in the same way as was the case in the OPF). A buy-out by an
     insurer is therefore typically more expensive for an OPF than joining an APF or a
     BPF. APFs and BPFs have their own requirements for entry, and an OPF may
     therefore have to pay an additional premium, for example, if its coverage level is
     below that of the other funds in the APF or in the BPF, respectively.
IV.5. Insurance companies
138. In the Netherlands, insurance companies have traditionally served employers in all
     industries where membership of an industry pension fund (BPF) is not obligatory.
     The five sectors in which NN achieves its highest revenue are vehicle repair,
     industry, financial institutions, advisory and research services and business services.
     As discussed in the section III.2.A.1, insurers usually offer DB and DC pension
     schemes.
71 These DC schemes are, however, different to those operated by insurers, as the members do not have
   the option to use their accumulated assets to buy an annuity elsewhere. Furthermore, some respondents
   to the market investigation suggested that DC schemes within OPFs typically constitute a type of
   second layer. They are designed for employees who participate in the standard DB scheme and have
   high salaries, part of which they want to invest in a DC scheme.
                                                         25

139. The DB schemes offered by insurers could be regarded as DB pensions in a stricter
     sense than those provided by BPFs and OPFs. The insurance company is contracted
     to provide a guaranteed level of benefit (usually defined as a percentage of the
     member’s average salary, based on the number of years’ employment). The level of
     benefits and contributions are determined by the insurance company using actuarial
     calculations but if, for example, investments perform less well than expected, or
     interest rates move such that the present value of liabilities increases relative to the
     present value of assets, the insurance company effectively covers the shortfall. It
     cannot increase contributions or reduce benefits to cover the loss (although it can of
     course offer less favourable terms for future years when the contract comes up for
     renewal). For this reason, insurance companies are required by solvency regulation
     to hold a certain level of capital in respect of DB arrangements.
140. The DC schemes offered by insurers are now mainly unit-linked policies, which
     involve each individual member paying contributions in order to accumulate their
     own ‘pension pot’, which is then used to purchase an annuity. PPIs (see section IV.6
     below) offer very similar DC arrangements for the accumulation phase but (as
     explained above in section III.2.A.1on product market definition) are much more
     restricted in the products they can offer members on retirement. Specifically, only
     insurers can offer fixed annuities as the provider of such products is taking on
     longevity and interest rate risk, which needs to be backed by a certain level of
     capital. Similarly to for DB schemes, only providers licensed as insurers and subject
     to solvency regulation are therefore allowed to carry out these activities.
141. In view of the above, insurers’ activities therefore differ from those of other actors,
     in part because they serve a different client base72, and in part because at least some
     of the products they offer are different in nature than those of other providers.
IV.6. Premiepensioeninstellingen (PPIs)
142. PPIs are a relatively new type of pension institution that became active on the Dutch
     market in January 2011. They can serve all industries apart from those where
     participation in a BPF is mandatory. PPIs only offer DC pensions as they are not
     licensed to carry the risk involved in running a DB pension scheme. There are
     currently ten PPIs active on the Dutch pensions market, including Nationale-
     Nederlanden Premium Pension Institution B.V. set up by NN and BeFrank PPI N.V.
     set up by Delta Lloyd.
143. PPIs were originally only able to provide the accumulation phase of a DC
     arrangement, but since July 2016 they can also offer decumulation products, but
     only in the form of variable annuities. (They are not able to offer fixed annuities, as
     these would, again, involve bearing longevity and interest rate risk.) PPIs do,
     however, act as distributors of fixed annuities offered by other providers.
144. A PPI that has been set up by a party other than an insurer may not have all the
     expertise and/or resources in-house, and so is likely to outsource certain parts of the
     value chain, in particular asset management and pension administration. A PPI
72 In particular relative to BPFs and OPFs: the industries served by BPFs are defined by law, and OPFs
   are by definition only for their own company. OPFs have always only been a feasible option for
   relatively large companies, and the size needed to make an OPF sustainable appears to be increasing,
   in view of the number of small OPFs closing.
                                                      26

     would also typically need to reinsure any additional risks that have been included in
     the package offered to pension customers, such as survivors’ pensions and disability
     insurance. The need for these different services means that a single PPI often
     involves the participation of a range of companies, which can each provide different
     expertise, e.g. an asset manager, a pensions administration company, a bank and an
     insurer. In this way, PPIs could be seen as having contributed to the ‘unbundling’ of
     pension provision.
IV.7. Algemeen pensioenfondsen (APFs)
145. The first APFs became active in 2016, and there are currently seven providers that
     have obtained regulatory approval from the Dutch central bank (DNB) including De
     Nationale APF set up by NN and the Delta Lloyd APF. There is thought to be one
     further APF in the process of being set up, for which a request for authorisation has
     not yet been submitted to DNB (according to market intelligence available at the
     time of writing).
146. An APF is a type of pension vehicle which operates a number of collective pension
     schemes. An APF is structured as a number of ‘circles’, each of which contains one
     or more pension funds. The pension funds within each circle all carry the risk of that
     circle collectively, but do not share risk with pension funds in other circles. As a
     result, investment of the pension fund assets is also carried out at ‘circle-level’.
147. An APF can operate both DB and DC circles (the two types of pension product
     would never be combined in the same circle), but to date most providers have set up
     DB circles. Only two providers, one of which is NN, offer DC circles. An employer
     or other pension fund wishing to join an APF typically has the choice between a
     number of different circles with different characteristics, in terms of premiums,
     investment strategy (i.e. the level of risk) and the coverage level. Alternatively, it
     could create its own circle, thus keeping more control over the style of the pension
     fund. This option would typically be of interest to larger pension funds or
     employers.
148. An APF can outsource various activities involved in the running of a pension
     scheme (including asset management, administration, fiduciary management and
     reinsurance). One of the main attractions of an APF for customers is that it allows
     pension funds to achieve economies of scale as they share these services with the
     other pension funds in their circle. Although an APF can theoretically outsource
     activities such as asset management and pensions' administration to any provider, in
     practice, almost all APFs have been set up by insurers, with the insurer providing
     these services. APFs could be seen as being simply a different business model for
     insurers, i.e. rather than providing pensions' administration and asset management
     directly to an employer as part of the contract for a pension scheme, the insurer
     gains this business via its own APF. As such, the different activities involved in
     providing a pension scheme have been technically unbundled, but are in most cases
     all still performed by the same small group of insurers.
149. Each of the circles within an APF is subject to the same solvency framework as
     individual pension funds. The APF itself is also required to hold 0.3% (or 0.2%
     when certain risks are insured) of assets under management as a buffer, with a
     minimum of EUR 0.5 million.
150. APFs can be set up by pension funds, insurers, pensions' administration
     organisations, banks and asset management companies. To date, of the seven APFs
                                                27

     which have obtained approval from the DNB, all but one73 have involved the
     participation of an insurer or (in one case) a pension provider. In addition to the
     Parties, the following companies have gained approval for APFs: Achmea (Centraal
     Beheer), TKP74/Aegon (Stap), PPGM (Volo), ASR (Het Nederlandse
     Pensioenfonds) and Unilever (Progress and Forward).
151. As discussed in more detail in the section on buy-outs, APFs are considered to offer
     an alternative to pension funds, in particular OPFs, which would otherwise be
     forced to look for a buy-out. A pension fund can transfer its liabilities to an APF,
     but, unlike in the case of a buy-out, there remains the risk of benefits being cut
     should the APF not have sufficient funding. Correspondingly, a buy-out is more
     expensive than the transfer of liabilities to an APF as the pension fund is effectively
     paying the insurer to take on the risk associated with the historic liabilities.
152. Unlike BPFs, APFs are open to pension funds and employers from all sectors, but
     the APF can itself set entry requirements. The main requirement for entry is often
     that the pension fund’s solvency level is similar enough to that of the other funds
     already in a circle.
153. As mentioned above, both NN and Delta Lloyd have recently set up APFs. NN’s
     APF, which received approval from DNB in November 2016, is a cooperation
     between NN’s wholly owned subsidiaries AZL (a pensions administration
     company) and NN Investment Partners. Delta Lloyd received approval for its APF
     in December 2016. The APF will outsource to [business partners A and B] and has
     entered into an agreement with [business partner C] for custody services.75
154. NN’s APF currently has five multi-client circles, four of which accept DB and
     collective defined contribution (CDC) schemes, and one of which is for DC
     schemes. Delta Lloyd’s APF has three DB circles. Both providers offer different
     risk levels, and correspondingly different return targets, in their various circles.
155. The Notifying Party submits that the merged entity would [Parties' future business
      strategy]. Depending on whether [strategic condition] by the time of the merger,
      this may [Parties' future business strategy].
IV.8. Conclusion and link with product market definition
156. To conclude, there are several types of pension product providers active in the
     Netherlands, including new types of pension vehicles, namely APFs and PPIs. The
     different regulations determine the types of pension products that can be offered by
     the different actors. The different actors and the products they offer are summarised
73   The APF created by Unilever is the only one not created by an insurer or a pension provider.
     Unilever’s APF is a specific case, as it serves as Unilever’s in-house pension provision for its own
     employees, i.e. it is not open to other pension funds. It thus functions more like an OPF, although it
     has the legal structure of an APF.
74   TKP is a pensions administrator that has a number of joint ventures with Aegon, including a PPI and
     an APF.
75   [Business partner B] already cooperates with [business partner C] in relation to custody services. As
     a provider of services to Delta Lloyds APF, [business partner B] will also outsource asset
     administration and reporting to [business partner C]. (For these services there is, however, no direct
     agreement between the APF and [business partner C].)
                                                        28



165. As can be seen from the tables above, in 2015 the merged entity had a market share
     of [30-40]% on the overall market for pension products (comprising all categories of
     schemes and both accumulation and decumulation products). An increment of [10-
     20]% is brought by Delta Lloyd. Following the transaction, the merged entity will
     be the market leader, followed by Aegon with a market share of around [20-30]%,
     ASR with a market share of [10-20]%, Vivat with [10-20]% and Achmea with [10-
     20]%. As such, it appears that the merged entity will have a strong position as
     market leader, but that four other relatively strong competitors will also remain
     present on the market.
166. The Notifying Party underlines that the remaining four strong competitors active on
     the market will have a disciplining effect on the merged entity.
167. In addition, the Notifying Party maintains that NN and Delta Lloyd are not
     particularly close competitors, as demonstrated by the switching patterns of
     customers leaving the two providers. Of customers who had a DB scheme with NN,
     and who switched providers when the scheme came up for renewal in 2015, [10-
     20]% (of those for whom the new provider is known) moved to Delta Lloyd (or
     BeFrank, Delta Lloyd’s PPI). The equivalent percentage for NN’s DC customers is
     [30-40]%. Of customers who had a DB scheme with Delta Lloyd, and who switched
     providers when the scheme came up for renewal in 2015, [10-20]% (of those for
     whom the new provider is known) moved to NN. [0-5%] of Delta Lloyd’s DC
     customers for whom the new provider is known switched to NN in 2015.76 These
     percentages are generally lower than would be expected, given the Parties’ market
     shares.77
168. The Notifying Party also points out that all sales of pension products in the
     Netherlands are realised through intermediaries (primarily actuarial consultants or
     other advisory firms), who are licensed under Dutch regulation. These
     intermediaries are required to solicit at least three proposals from different pension
     providers when offering pension products to customers, which, according to the
     Notifying Party, allows customers to make a well informed choice and increases
     buyer power in the market. The Notifying Party also mentions that, thanks to the
     services provided by intermediaries, when a pension contract expires customers can
     easily check if they could get a better offer elsewhere.
169. The Notifying Party submits that the increasing unbundling of pension products
     seen in recent years has made it easier for customers to switch parts of their
     coverage to other providers, restricting the ability of insurance companies to
     increase prices on the ancillary policies provided with the pension scheme (e.g.
     group disability and unemployment insurance).
170. In the Notifying Party’s view, the pensions market is, in part, a bidding market,
     meaning that all competitors can easily and quickly increase their market share. The
     Notifying Party argues that this is particularly true for DC schemes, where
     competitors are not restricted in their ability to compete for new policies by
     solvency or capital requirements.
76   It should be noted that these percentages are estimates prepared by the Parties on the basis of the
     relatively small proportion of lost customers for whom they know the identity of the new provider.
77   The sole exception being customers switching from NN’s DC product, where a slightly higher
     proportion than would be expected moved to Delta Lloyd.
                                                        31

171. Further to the above, the Notifying Party emphasises that most new policies being
     taken out are now DC policies, and that insurers face additional competition in this
     area as PPIs can also offer DC schemes. The Notifying Party submits that the DC
     products offered by PPIs are, from a customer perspective, very much equivalent to
     those provided by insurers. Although PPIs cannot bear any biometric risks, they can
     outsource this to third party providers and are therefore able to offer the same risk
     riders (e.g. survivor’s pensions and disability insurance) as insurers.
172. The Notifying Party maintains that there is no risk of coordinated effects arising
     after the Transaction, as the merged entity will be one of five main insurance
     companies competing on the market, and will also be subject to competitive
     pressure from other pension providers, namely OPFs, BPFs, PPIs (including those
     set up by banks and asset managers) and APFs.
173. Lastly, the Notifying Party points out that NN wins a much lower proportion of new
     business than would be suggested by its market share. In terms of newly written
     premium (NWP), NN has a market share of [5-10]% in pension products (compared
     to [20-30]% in GWP).78 In the Notifying Party’s view, this demonstrates that NN’s
     market position is less strong than it might first appear.
174. The results of the market investigation generally confirmed the Notifying Parties’
     claims, whilst often painting a slightly more nuanced picture. The Commission
     notes in particular the following points.
175. The market investigation confirmed that actuarial consultants play an important role
     as intermediaries in the pensions market. They organise tenders for customers
     interested in finding a pension provider and have extensive knowledge of all the
     products available on the market. An actuarial consultant would typically do a full
     scan of all the products of the type a customer is interested in (e.g. DC schemes)
     before preparing a longlist of possible providers, based on a number of criteria, such
     as the price of the scheme, communication with members and the investment
     performance of the provider. The consultant would then, in conjunction with the
     customer, prepare a shortlist of usually three providers, who would be invited to
     present their products to the client. The actuarial firm would advise the customer on
     their final choice of provider and negotiate any changes to the terms proposed by the
     insurance company.
176. In view of the above, it can be concluded that customers are able to compare all the
     products available on the market, and benefit from greater buyer power than they
     would otherwise have as a result of the actuary’s role in negotiating for them. The
     results of the market investigation confirmed that while some customers may
     suggest that switching cost may be high, the majority of respondents considered that
     there were no significant obstacles to switching.79 For example, when asked to
     identify any obstacles that could deter them from switching pension provider
78   NWP correspond to the total premiums (direct and assumed) written by an insurer before deductions
     for reinsurance and ceding commission (e.g. agent or distributor costs, commissions and/or payments
     for reinsurance), limited to the premium associated with products/policies that originated in a
     particular year. NWP exclude renewals, i.e. renewals are not considered to be “newly” written
     premiums. GWP comprise the same categories of premiums written by insurer, the only difference
     being that they are not limited to premiums written in a given year.
79   Pre-notification calls with customers and distributors and replies to Q5.1 of Questionnaire 2 to
     pensions customers.
                                                       32

     customers provided the following responses “no obstacles except some additional
     admin work”, “we have not encountered any obstacles”, “we haven’t had any
     obstacles in the past and don’t foresee these any in the future”.80 Overall,
     respondents generally confirmed that there are no barriers to switching, even if a
     minority of them suggested that it may imply certain administrative costs.81
177. There is evidence that even those companies which consider insurers to be the only
     option do regularly hold tenders to see if another provider would offer them a more
     attractive price.82 Furthermore, respondents who have stayed with the same insurer
     for a fairly long period have in many cases held tenders every time the contract
     comes up for renewal.83
178. The Notifying Party submitted that contracts expire every three to five years. The
     majority of DC customers who responded to the market investigation have five-year
     contracts but some also have shorter contract periods.84 The Notifying Party noticed
     that switching between different providers of DB schemes is a lengthy and
     complicated process, if it concerns moving the past assets and liabilities (an
     actuarial valuation has to be carried out to confirm the equivalence of the two
     arrangements as regards the past, guaranteed benefits). At the same time, however,
     it appears that customers can switch provider for the future accumulation, leaving
     their accumulated capital with the old supplier, which is much less complex.85
     Furthermore, a large proportion of the current switching between pension scheme
     providers occurs when customers are also moving from DB to DC. Even more so in
     such cases they tend to leave the historic assets and liabilities from their old DB
     scheme with the previous provider, and have no difficulty in setting up a new DC
     scheme. The Notifying Party explained and the results of the market investigation
     confirmed that switching to a new provider for the future accrual is significantly less
     complex than moving the historic assets.
179. Indeed the information regarding the Parties switching indicate that customers do
      switch provider relatively frequently. [The switching data submitted by the Parties
      supports this conclusion.]86 [The switching data submitted by the Parties supports
      this conclusion.] In view of these data the Commission considers that the market
      for group pension products is relatively dynamic, and customers (employers) do
      monitor the market and do not seem to be deterred from switching by the cost of
      the length of the switching process.
180. Insurers’ share of new business (as measured by newly written premiums, NWP)
     can fluctuate more from year to year, and gives, arguably, a better indication of
     competitor’s current market position. As submitted by the Notifying Party, in 2015
     in overall pension products NN had a much lower share of NWP (only [5-10]%)
     than in GWP ([20-30]%). The Commission considers that this could indicate that
80   Q5.1 of Questionnaire 2 to pension customers.
81   Q5.1 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers.
82   Q5 and Q5.1 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers: “Every five years when the contract expires a
     tender is organised to select new provider or stay with current provider.”
83   Q5.1 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers. “For every renewal quotes were obtained from a
     number of insurers. Delta Lloyd always had the best offer.”
84   Q4 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers.
85   Form CO, minutes of the call with one of competitors of 11 January 2017.
86   […].
                                                        33

     NN’s role in active acquisitions of pensions is more limited (while showing that NN
     has a relatively large accumulated book due to its historical role as a major player
     on the Dutch pensions market). The Parties had a combined market share in NWP of
     [30-40]%, thus lower than their combined market share in GWP of [30-40]%. In
     view of the above the Commission considers that the combined entity will certainly
     not have a position any stronger than that suggested by its market share in GWP.
181. The market investigation largely confirmed the Notifying Party’s claim that it is
     possible for customers to purchase the additional insurance policies (such as group
     disability insurance) from another provider. At the same time, and more importantly
     neither distributors (actuarial companies) nor customers attach particular importance
     to these additional products that might be included in the package when choosing a
     pension provider. Customers commented on the convenience of purchasing their
     pension scheme and the additional insurance policies from the same provider, and a
     relatively high proportion did appear to have insurance policies (mainly disability
     insurance) from their pension provider, but it did not seem that the presence or
     absence of these policies would have a significant influence on their choice of
     insurer for the company’s pension scheme. Most confirmed that they could easily
     purchase such an insurance policy elsewhere if necessary.87 Similarly, when
     describing their process of preparing long- and shortlists of pension providers for
     customers, actuarial companies did not consider these additional insurance policies
     to be amongst the deciding criteria.88
182. The market investigation strongly confirmed that customers and distributors
     consider DC schemes offered by PPIs and by insurers to be largely equivalent. This
     will be analysed in more detail in the section below on the potential market for DC
     pension products. When considering a potential market for all pension products, this
     means that at least on part of the market – DC pension schemes – insurers are facing
     competitive pressure from another type of actor. The importance of this competition
     is all the greater in view of the fact that the majority of new business is in DC.
183. The Notifying Party further maintained that other actors, namely OPFs, BPFs and
     APFs, would also exert competitive pressure on the merged entity. However, in
     view of the very conclusive evidence that the number of OPFs is decreasing rapidly,
     and that the companies who are having to close their OPFs are looking for other
     solutions, it would seem highly unlikely that OPFs can in any way act as a
     competitive constraint on the merged entity (i.e. in the current climate, no company
     which does not already have an OPF would consider setting one up). BPFs,
     meanwhile, could offer an alternative for a small proportion of insurers’ customers,
     but the fundamental differences in the product itself (as described above in the
     section IV.2 on BPFs) mean that the number of customers who would view a BPF
     as a real possibility would remain very limited. Furthermore, the market
     investigation confirmed that the vast majority of BPFs are in no way actively
     seeking to attract new customers, and their role on the market cannot therefore be
     assimilated to that of a genuine competitive force.89 Lastly, APFs possibly offer the
     most realistic alternative for some insurers’ customers, although it should be noted,
     first, that the main customers of APFs are expected to be companies closing their
     OPFs rather than former clients of insurance companies, and, second, that almost all
87   Q12 and Q12.1 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers.
88   Prenotification calls.
89   Replies to Questionnaire 5, pension funds.
                                                     34

     the commercially active APFs have been set up by insurance companies (arguably
     with the intention of transferring their DB business to a more profitable alternative).
     In conclusion, therefore, the competitive pressure exerted by other actors, with the
     notable exception of PPIs, is likely to remain very limited.
184. As mentioned above, the majority of respondents to the market investigation
     confirmed that there will remain sufficient choice on the market for pension
     products but a small number did voice concerns. In particular, one major competitor
     stressed that the reduction in the number of players active on the market for
     insurance products may be more significant than it would appear at first sight, in
     view of the fact that at least one and potentially two of the six main insurers are no
     longer active in traditional DB and DC pension products. 90 A minority of other
     participants also had concerns about the number of providers that will remain active
     on the market, some of which related specifically to DB pension products. These
     will therefore be discussed in more detail in the section below on the market for DB
     products.
185. In relation to pension products more generally, other competitors and distributors
     also confirmed that insurers are likely to concentrate increasingly on their APFs and
     PPIs, at the expense of their traditional DB and DC products. One competitor
     commented that competition will be limited on the market for pension products due
     to the current low interest rates and longevity risk (factors which are less important
     for APFs and PPIs).91 A small number of customers also commented on the lack of
     choice they will have following the merger. A DC customer claimed that the
     company would only have three providers to choose from when its contract next
     comes up for renewal.92 It should however, firstly, be noted that the majority of
     respondents consider PPIs to be an alternative to insurers’ DC products. There is no
     indication in the responses to the market investigation which would suggest that
     customers prefer to choose an insurer rather than a PPI for objective reasons.
186. Secondly, as demonstrated by […] and some responses to the market investigation,
     insurers’ growing tendency to direct customers towards their PPIs and APFs at the
     expense of their classic DB and DC products, if such is the case, is taking place
     irrespective of the Transaction. Independent industry reports have also picked up on
     this trend93 and, as this appear to be a change which insurers are forced to make in
     order to remain profitable, it will be highly likely to continue at the same pace
     whether the Transaction takes place or not.
187. A second concern voiced by a number of participants was that the loss of Delta
     Lloyd could be particularly damaging to the market due to the role that Delta Lloyd
     has played as an innovator and as an aggressive competitor on price. One distributor
90   Prenotification meeting with one of competitors.
91   Q120.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors. Due to low interest environment and longevity risk we
     don’t expect strong competition in this market.
92   Q31.1 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers. In our last tender we identified four serious parties,
     of which one (Delta Lloyd) is now being taken over by NN group. That leaves only three parties when
     our contract is up for renewal after 2020.
93   Onderzoek Algemene Pensioenfondsen 2016” by Sprenkels & Verschuren published in December
     2016.
                                                      35

     commented, for example, that Delta Lloyd’s innovative capability would be “sorely
     missed”.94
188. The responses of other respondents, however, provide a more nuanced picture.
     Furthermore, evidence provided by Delta Lloyd proves that these concerns are not
     substantiated. One distributor, for example, explains that Delta Lloyd was a “price
     fighter” in DB, but that as this market is disappearing anyway, the effect will be
     “almost marginal”.95 More importantly Delta Lloyd confirmed that it used to
     compete mainly on price, but this has changed in the last two years. Therefore,
     Delta Lloyd’s reputation would appear to be based, to some extent at least, more on
     its past performance rather than its current strategy. A distributor also comments
     that Delta Lloyd is not seen as a top player in any particular market.96
189. Delta Lloyd’s overall position on the insurance market, and in particular claims
     from a small number of respondents that it plays an important role as an innovative
     competitor, are discussed in more detail in section V.1.D, following the analysis of
     the narrower markets within insurance.
190. In conclusion, the Commission considers that the merged entity’s position on a
     hypothetical market for overall pension products will not be such as to significantly
     impede effective competition. The general shift from DB to DC means that most
     new business is in DC products, where the merged entity will face competition from
     PPIs in addition to from the other main insurers. Switching providers is not
     infrequent and when customers do decide to move their pension scheme, they are
     well served by actuarial consultants, who have extensive knowledge of the market
     and can advise customers on the best product to meet their needs. Buyer power
     therefore plays an important role, as customers have a wide choice of products to
     choose from and are well-informed as to the options available.
191. In view of the above the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
     significantly impede effective competition in the market for pension products
     offered by insurance companies.
        V.1.A.2 DB pension products
192. As explained above, one of the plausible relevant markets is the market for pension
     products limited to DB products only.
193. The Parties’ market shares on the market for DB pension products provided by
     insurers are as follows:
94   Q43.1 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
95   Q34.4 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products. “DL was a price fighter in the market
     for insured DB, so the bottom pricing is taken out of the market. However, since we expect insured
     DB plans to be replaced by soft DB plans (APFs/BPFs) or DC plans, the actual impact will be
     almost marginal”.
96   Q34.4 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products. “NN and DL have not been excelling in
     any markets.”
                                                       36


      products98; and iii) that demographic changes mean that DB is no longer a viable
      alternative.
199. The Notifying Party further argues that the desire for lower cost pension solutions
     with more flexibility means that DC is consistently favoured over DB. The fall in
     costs for DC schemes seen in recent years (as a result of the introduction of PPIs)
     has therefore further contributed to the shift from DB to DC.
200. The Notifying Party also comments on the general acceptance within the Dutch
     insurance industry, and within Dutch society more widely, that the move towards
     DC is essential for maintaining a sustainable pension system. In particular, the
     national financial supervisory authority (AFM) commented in a recent position
     paper99 on the advantages of personal pension savings, of the style of DC plans,
     over group savings plans.
201. Extensive internal documentation provided by Delta Lloyd100 appears to confirm
      that, irrespective of the Transaction, its strategy has been to [Delta Lloyd's business
      strategy], and that [Delta Lloyd's assessment of market conditions]. In addition, it
      should be noted that Delta Lloyd is known to […], thus, irrespective of the
      Transaction, Delta Lloyd was likely to scale down its activity in the DB area. NN’s
      internal documentation also shows that [NN's business strategy].
202. The results of the market investigation generally confirmed that insurers are no
     longer keen to offer DB products. A number of competitors commented on the
     reduction in activity that has already been seen in this market, with some insurers
     only continuing to offer DB to existing clients and certainly not actively looking for
     new DB business.101 As mentioned above in recital 183, there is also a perception
     that insurers are trying to move their DB clients into their APF, a solution which
     allows the insurer to avoid the high capital requirements associated with DB
     pensions. This is publicly known to be the case for Achmea, which announced in
     December 2015 that it would no longer be offering ‘classic’ DC and DB products,
     and is also true to varying degrees for other providers. One customer reported
     having changed to DC as its provider was no longer prepared to offer DB on the
     same terms.102
203. The majority of customers who responded to the market investigation consider DB
     schemes to be too expensive to be a realistic option. Customers who mention having
98   Several reasons explain this trend: DB products entail a higher risk for employers than DC schemes,
     whose costs are more predictable; changes in accounting rules oblige employers to reflect the
     pension scheme liabilities on their balance sheet; there is increasing concern around the possible
     consequences for DB pension provision of insolvency of the company.
99   Geef elke Nederlander een persoonlijke pensioenrekening, AFM, 24 June 2016. Available at
     https://www.afm nl/nl-nl/professionals/nieuws/2016/jun/position-paper-pensioen.
100  Including internal documents on capital planning for 2015-2020, the annual report for 2015, strategic
     plans for 2015-2019 and a presentation to investors.
101  Q7 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors. “No insurers are actively pushing DB today”
     Q9 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors. “We see that there is little on offer in terms of guaranteed DB
     pensions. Some insurers don’t offer these products at all any more or only very defensively.”
     “Tendency is more focus on DC in order to avoid interest and longevity risk.”
     Q23.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors “A lot of insurers have stopped offering DB contracts with
     hard guarantees (except Aegon, NN, Delta Lloyd)”
102  Q5.1 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers. “We were no longer allowed to continue the scheme
     under the same conditions fiscally, so we moved to defined contribution.”
                                                       38

     moved from DB to DC clearly do not envisage moving back to DB at any point in
     the foreseeable future.103 The responses provided also showed that employers are
     very aware of the risk that the employer bears for DB schemes, and are not keen to
     take on these risks again.104 One employer also commented on the difficulty of
     transferring DB pension rights between employers when an employee changes
     jobs.105 Competitors also note that the cost of DB schemes leads many employers to
     consider moving to DC.106
204. Actuarial companies also seem to generally expect DB schemes to disappear over
     the coming years. One commented, for example, that they expect insured DB
     schemes to be replaced by solutions offered by APFs and BPFs. Another predicted
     that DB may be entirely replaced by APF’s and DC solutions within 5-10 years.107
     Actuarial companies appear to share the opinion that DB pension schemes have
     simply become too expensive for most employers, who are now obliged to look for
     alternatives.108 One distributor does comment that Delta Lloyd was a “price fighter”
     on the DB market, but explains that it does not, however, expect the Transaction to
     have any significant impact on this market for the very reason that DB products are
     being replaced by the BPFs, APFs and insurers’ DC plans.109
205. One competitor expressed the opinion that the merged entity would be able to
     control prices on the DB market (contrasting this with the situation on the DC
     market where, in its view, there is much more competition). No further explanation
     was given, however, as to how or why the merged entity would be able to exercise
     such power, beyond its having a market share of [30-40]%, as shown in the table
     above. No other competitors expressed similar views. To the contrary most
     competitors seemed to be of the opinion that all insurers are simply trying to move
     as much business out of DB as possible.
206. The Commission notes that the Parties’ market shares in the area of DB products
     measured by NWP are estimated to amount to around [10-20]% in 2015110, clearly
     much lower than the market share calculated on the basis of GWP which takes into
     account the legacy premium. The Commission considers that this information, could
     indicate not only that DB schemes are becoming less relevant (as explained above),
     but also that within this shrinking market for DB pension products in the recent
     years the Parties have not been particularly strong.
103  Q8 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers. “DB costs are too uncertain for the future.”
     “DB is unrealistic as it is too expensive”
     “A DB scheme would be our first choice, but it is unaffordable. That’s why we’ve chosen a DC
     arrangement.”
104  Q7 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers.
105  Q8 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers.
106  Q7 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
107  Q30 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products. If interest rates stay low for another 5 to
     10 years we believe that the entire insured DB market (hard guarantee) will be replaced by either
     APF DB (no guarantee) or DC plans.
108  Q30 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
109  Q34.4 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
110  In the Form CO, NN provided NWP data for 2015 for overall non-unit linked pension products that
     is pension products offering hard guarantees. Since the market investigation confirmed that none of
     the major 6 insurers provided non-unit linked DC products in 2015, this market data can be used as a
     proxy for the NWP for DB pension products, which in view of the results of the market investigation
     remain the only existing category of non-unit linked pension products.
                                                       39

207. One customer also voiced a specific concern about the amount of choice that would
     remain in the DB market following the merger.111 Whilst it may be true that the
     products offered by the different insurers are not identical, and the Transaction will
     limit the choice within DB products offered, the Commission notes that there is
     overwhelming evidence to suggest that in the coming years there will be even less
     demand for any DB products anyway, and that irrespective of the Transaction
     insurers will be reducing their presence on the DB market.
208. In addition, the difficulties associated with changing DB provider (as described
     above) means that the vast majority of existing DB schemes will almost invariably
     stay with their current provider for the historic assets and liabilities, even though
     they may move to a new provider (either DB or DC) for future entitlements. In
     addition, there appears to be almost no genuinely ‘new’ DB business (i.e. business
     from clients looking for a pension scheme for the first time). As such, market shares
     on the DB market are likely to remain fairly stable as the market gradually declines,
     and the proposed transaction will have little or no effect on this.
209. In view of the above the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
     significantly impede effective competition in the market for pension products
     limited to DB schemes offered by insurance companies.
        V.1.A.3 DC pension products (accumulation)
210. Insurers have traditionally been the main providers of DC pensions on the Dutch
     market.
211. The main development in DC pensions in recent years has been the introduction of
     PPIs, which, as described in section IV.6, offer exclusively DC pension schemes
     and have seen significant growth since their introduction on the market in 2008.
     There are currently ten PPIs registered with the Dutch Central Bank (DNB).112 Most
     of the six major Dutch insurers, including NN and Delta Lloyd, have set up their
     own PPIs namely NN’s being Nationale-Nederlanden Premium Pension Institution
     B.V. (NN PPI) and Delta Lloyd’s BeFrank PPI N.V. (BeFrank). The remaining PPIs
     have been set up by institutions such as banks and asset managers, including
     Robeco, ABN Amro/APG and Towers Watson. PPIs still account for only a very
     small part of the Dutch pensions market (just under 2% in 2015 based on regular
     GWP), but have grown rapidly since their introduction, with regular GWP
     increasing from EUR 112 million in 2013 to EUR 682 million in 2015 (+509% over
     the period 2013-2015). Over this period, new actors have become active, in
     particular Zwitserleven PPI N.V. (Vivat) and Stichting Towers Watson PPI in 2014.
212. At present, only two of the six commercial APFs which have been granted approval
     offer DC circles (and each only has one DC circle), and it seems likely that APFs
     will play a more important role in DB than in DC. Furthermore, as mentioned
111  Q23 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers. The choice available will certainly be reduced in the
     area of insured DB (average salary pensions). Only Zwitserleven, Aegon, ASR and NN/DL will then
     offer average salary pension schemes. The question is whether this is sufficient. They don’t all offer
     the same alternatives, so for certain requirements in the area of insured DB, it could be the case that
     there will remain no or very little choice or competition.
112  PPIs can also be set up as cross-border IORPs (Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provisions),
     a type of European pension fund, but this has not as yet had any notable impact on the market as a
     whole.
                                                        40



     meaningful competitive pressure on unit-linked DC products (or on DB
     products)114.
220. The Notifying Party submits that market shares based on GWP do not provide an
     accurate representation of the Parties’ competitive position on the market, as they
     take into account their legacy portfolios. The Notifying Party considers market share
     data based on NWP to be more representative of current market conditions. On this
     basis, the merged entity would have a combined market share of [40-50]% (NN [5-
     10]%, Delta Lloyd [30-40]%)115 in DC pension products provided by insurers, and
     of [30-40]% (NN [10-20]%, Delta Lloyd [20-30]%)116 in DC pension products
     provided by insurers and PPIs. The Commission notes that these market shares are
     not significantly different to those calculated on the basis of GWP, and in a market
     restricted to insurers’ DC products, the market share based on NWP is in fact higher
     than that based on GWP. This suggests that the market shares based on GWP are
     also generally representative of the new business being won by the Parties.
221. The Notifying Party also submits that the Parties are not particularly close
     competitors on the DC market (irrespective of whether their PPIs are included in the
     market definition), as demonstrated by the switching patterns of customers who
     leave the two providers. Of customers who had a DC scheme with NN, and who
     switched providers when the scheme came up for renewal in 2015, [30-40]% (of
     those for whom the new provider is known) moved to Delta Lloyd (or BeFrank). Of
     customers who had a DC scheme with Delta Lloyd, and who switched providers
     when the scheme came up for renewal in 2015, [0-5%] (of those for whom the new
     provider is known) moved to NN.117
222. The Commission notes that the percentage of DC customers moving from NN to
     Delta Lloyd (or BeFrank) is therefore slightly higher than would be expected based
     on market shares, but that the percentage of Delta Lloyd customers moving to NN is
     significantly lower than would be expected.
223. The Notifying Party also submits, as a general comment referring to the overall life
     insurance market, that four other strong competitors will remain active on the
     market, which will exert significant competitive pressure on the merged entity. In
     addition, the Notifying Party maintains that, irrespective of whether PPIs are
     considered to form part of the same product market as insurers’ DC products, they
     can be considered as an important competitive force, all the more so because there
     are significantly lower barriers to entry for a company wishing to set up a PPI than
     for a new insurer trying to enter the market. This is both because PPIs do not require
     an insurers’ licence and because the set-up costs are lower.
114  Q7.1 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products. Since almost all DC products in the
     Netherlands are unit linked the main distinction remains between DB and DC.
     Q33.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
     For us, DC is unit-linked and DB is non-unit-linked.
     The DC market mainly consists of unit-linked products. Most suppliers have stopped offering DC
     based on guaranteed capital.
115  Next to Aegon [20-30]%, Vivat [10-20]%, ASR [10-20]%, Achmea [5-10]% and other competitors
     ([0-5]%).
116  Next to Aegon [15-25]%, Vivat [5-10]%, ASR [10-20]%, Achmea [5-15]% and other competitors
     ([5-25]%).
117  It should be noted that these percentages are estimates prepared by the Parties on the basis of the
     relatively small proportion of lost customers for whom they know the identity of the new provider.
                                                        43

224. The Notifying Party argues that insurers’ DC products should be viewed as being
     part of a wider overall DC market, i.e. including PPIs and APFs, or that, even if
     these actors are not included in the same market, the competitive pressure they exert
     on insurers should at least be taken into account.
225. The Notifying Party submits that PPIs are able to offer competitive terms for
     pensions due to their low administrative costs. It argues that, from a customers’
     point of view, there is little difference between choosing a DC scheme from an
     insurer and a PPI for the accumulation phase. Although the PPI will need to source
     insurance for the risk riders (such as survivors’ pensions and disability insurance)
     from a third party provider, this will not have a direct effect on the customer.
226. Delta Lloyd developed some of these arguments and pointed out that the
      introduction of PPIs on the Dutch insurance market has enabled banks and asset
      managers to enter the market for DC products, which has significantly changed
      market dynamics. It further highlighted the rapid growth that PPIs have seen since
      they first become active in January 2011. Internal documents provided by Delta
      Lloyd show that [supporting evidence].118
227. The Notifying Party also emphasises the effect of competition from BPFs and APFs
     (although without specifying whether this relates specifically to the DC or the DB
     market). The Notifying Party refers to several external sources which have reported
     on the changes being seen on the Dutch pensions market, in particular the expansion
     of certain BPFs’ membership beyond the industries with which they are strictly
     associated119, and the increasing pressure being exerted on insurers by APFs and
     PPIs120.
228. The results of the market investigation indicate that the Parties are not particularly
     close competitors on the DC market. Delta Lloyd and NN are sometimes mentioned
     by other insurers as close competitors on the pensions market, but no more often
     than the other main providers, in particular Aegon, which seems to be considered as
     NN’s closest competitor.121 NN and Delta Lloyd are often mentioned amongst the
     top competitors for DC products, but again, alongside other major competitors such
     as Aegon, Vivat (Zwitserleven), ASR, Achmea, and other providers of PPIs (such as
     ABN Amro and Brand New Day). In terms of strengths and weaknesses associated
     with the insurers, NN and Delta Lloyd do not appear to be especially close:
     competitors typically describe Delta Lloyd as an aggressive player in terms of price
     strategy (although now less so than in the past). Its PPI BeFrank is seen as a strong
     brand, whilst its main weakness is considered to be its capital position. A number of
     competitors also commented on the flexibility of its products and its good
     administration. NN, meanwhile, was typically rated poorly on these last two points,
     but regarded as having a strong capital position and a large portfolio, giving it
     stability.
118  Based on data used in an internal presentation given on […] 2016: […].
119  Pensioenfonds zorgverzekeraars breidt uit in financiële sector, Het Financieele Dagblad, 10 March
     2017,           https://fd nl/economie-politiek/1191687/pensioenfonds-zorgverzekeraarsbreidt-uit-in-
     financiele-sector.
120  Toekomstbestendigheid levensverzekeraars onder de loep, Dutch Central Bank, 26 November 2014,
     https://www.dnb.nl/nieuws/nieuwsoverzicht-en-archief/dnbulletin-2014/dnb315467.jsp.
121  Q22 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                        44

229. Distributors’ perceptions of the Parties appear to be fairly similar to those of
     competitors. Both are regarded as being among the top providers of DC products,
     alongside a range of other suppliers including Aegon (as an insurer and as a PPI),
     ASR, Achmea, Brand New Day, Vivat (Zwitserleven) and ABN Amro’s PPI.122
     Distributors generally regarded Delta Lloyd as an innovative player, its main
     weakness again being its poor solvency position, whilst NN is seen as a large,
     established actor, with poor performance in terms of administration. 123 Distributors
     regard NN and Delta Lloyd as close competitors, but see Aegon as closer to both
     than they are to each other. One distributor also pointed out that in DC, the
     closeness of competition depends more on each individual customer’s requirements,
     and that it is therefore difficult to generalise.124
230. A number of customers also commented on NN’s poor service levels, although most
     equally recognise NN’s strengths as one of the largest providers, commenting on the
     overall quality of the products and its financial strength. Delta Lloyd, meanwhile,
     was generally seen as more service-orientated.125
231. It can be concluded from the above that NN and Delta Lloyd are not particularly
     close competitors, when considered in the context of the group of five main insurers
     which would remain following the Transaction. Their strengths and weaknesses, as
     perceived by market participants, appear to be quite different, and whilst being rated
     amongst the main providers for DC, they are not mentioned more often or
     consistently more highly than other providers, including PPIs.
232. The opinions expressed by respondents to the market investigation largely
     corroborated the view of the Parties in terms of the closeness of competition
     between insurers’ DC products and PPIs. Actuarial consultants (i.e. distributors of
     pension products) were unanimously of the view that PPIs compete with insurers, at
     least for DC products.126 They also stated quite categorically that they would
     routinely propose PPIs alongside insurers’ DC products when compiling long- and
     shortlists of possible providers for their clients. They evaluate DC products based on
     various criteria, such as price, communication with members and investment
     lifecycles, but the fact whether the product is provided by an insurer, by a PPI set up
     by an insurer or by another PPI does not have any bearing on the advice they give to
     their clients.127
233. The information provided by customers on the tender processes used to select their
     current provider also confirmed that PPIs and insurers’ DC solutions often appear
     on the same shortlists.128 In addition, the market investigation demonstrated that
     competitors consider PPIs and traditional DC products to be competing for the same
     business. All pension providers who expressed an opinion on this point saw insurers
     and PPIs as alternative providers of the same type of DC solution.129 Moreover, a
122  Q21 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
123  Q22 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
124  Q23 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
125  Q21 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers.
126  Q29 and Q29.1 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
127  Views expressed during prenotification calls with actuarial companies.
128  Q9 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers.
129  Q6.2 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                       45

     number of responses suggested that at least some of the Parties’ competitors are
     looking to direct their DC business as far as possible towards their PPI, again
     demonstrating the substitutability of the products.130 More general comments from
     both customers and competitors also demonstrated that PPIs are considered to
     constitute a genuine alternative to insurers’ DC products.131
234. Nonetheless, the market investigation did also show that customers perceive there to
     be certain differences between PPIs and insurers. Although opinions were somewhat
     varied, there appeared to be a general, albeit rather subjective, conviction that PPIs
     constituted a cheaper alternative to insurers’ products. Some respondents also
     viewed PPIs as being more flexible and offering better online portals for members
     to manage their pensions, although these views were by no means shared by all
     respondents. Insurers, meanwhile, were associated with reliability and
     respectability, although service levels were not always judged to be very high due to
     the inflexibility of their systems.132 In addition, a small number of respondents
     pointed out that PPIs cannot offer decumulation products, and that they cannot
     therefore fully replicate the product range offered by insurers.133 Viewed in the
     context of the overall results of the market investigation, these differences do not
     put in question the clear conclusion that DC products provided by PPIs exert
     significant competitive pressure to DC products provided by insurers.
235. In addition to the above, the results of the market investigation also confirmed that
     there are a sufficient number of PPIs competing on the market to offer a good level
     of choice for customers. Actuarial companies submitted that there are often a
     number of PPIs that would meet any particular client’s needs.134 The majority of
     customers also expressed the view that the introduction of PPIs has led to more
     choice and increased competition on the Dutch market.135
236. Furthermore, the introduction of PPIs is widely thought to have brought prices down
     in the DC market. As explained in the introductory section, PPIs are not required to
     hold the same levels of capital as insurers operating DC schemes, and also do not
     have the same level of historic liabilities on their balance sheets, meaning that they
     can offer lower prices to new customers. This was strongly confirmed by actuarial
     companies in particular who commented on PPI’s low pricing and efficient
     administration, suggesting that prices on the DC market as a whole had fallen since
     For SME and large companies with DC schemes the PPI can be an alternative for the insurance
     company.
     Insurance companies and PPIs compete directly in the pension market (with respect to DC).
130  Q14 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors No renewals from DC to DC as our default for a DC renewal
     is PPI (major competitor). Q18.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors Some insurance companies do
     not offer DC anymore other than their PPIs (major competitor).
131  Q13.1 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers Besides the big pension insurance companies, the
     number of alternatives (PPI, APF) is growing over the years.
     Q120.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors The DC market has […] competition from PPIs, APFs …
132  Q19 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers
133  Q22 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers.
134  Q41.1 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products There are several PPIs for most of the
     customers in DC schemes
135  Q22 of Questionnaire 2 to pensions customers. With the introduction of PPIs and APFs there is more
     choice for employers on the pension market.
                                                       46

     the introduction of PPIs.136 As mentioned above, the responses of customers also
     showed that they find PPIs to be generally cheaper than insurers’ DC products.
237. When considering the effect of the introduction of PPIs, it is important to note that
     all of the main six insurance companies have set up, or are closely involved in, a
     PPI.137 As mentioned above, the market investigation also provided evidence that at
     least some of the major insurers may be trying to re-route their DC business into
     their PPIs. For NN and Delta Lloyd, it is largely true to say that they have a
     similarly strong position in PPIs as in DC products provided under their insurance
     brands.138 The same is not, however, the case for the other insurers in the 'big six"
     (with Aegon, for example, having a significantly higher market share in 2016 in the
     market for PPIs than in the market for insurers’ DC products, and the reverse for
     Vivat). More importantly, the proportion of the market not captured by the ‘big six’
     is considerably higher in PPIs than in DC products provided by insurers, at [30-
     40]% compared to only [0-5]%. This illustrates the fact that the introduction of PPIs
     has made it possible for other players from outside the insurance sector, in particular
     banks and asset managers to successfully enter the DC market. The PPI set up by
     ABN Amro Bank and APG (a small Dutch pension provider and asset manager) had
     a market share of around [10-20]% in 2015, whilst the PPIs created by Rabobank
     and pensions administrator PGGM, and by actuarial consultancy Towers Watson
     have also become serious contenders.139
238. In conclusion, the market investigation generally confirms that there will continue to
     be sufficient choice on the market for DC pension products, in particular due to the
     new competitors that have entered the market by setting up PPIs. The introduction
     of this new pension vehicle has significantly lowered barriers to entry, and is
     therefore also likely to ensure that the market remains competitive in the foreseeable
     future. The presence of the five main insurers which would remain following the
     merger, and the currently ten PPIs will, in any case, be sufficient to ensure
     competition and choice for customers.
239. In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
     significantly impede effective competition in the market for pension products
     limited to DC schemes.
        V.1.A.4 DC decumulation products
240. When a member of a DC pension scheme reaches retirement, they use the capital
     built up in the accumulation phase to purchase an annuity. Each individual is free to
     purchase an annuity from any provider, irrespective of which insurance company,
136  Q28 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products. “PPIs have caused a dramatic decrease
     in pricing of DC schemes both for the employer [. . . ] and for the employee [. . . ]. “
137  NN, Delta Lloyd, Aegon and Vivat (through its subsidiary Zwitserleven) have all set up PPIs. The
     Notifying Party also considers Achmea to have a PPI (Stichting International Pension Solutions) but
     Achmea regards this as a separate entity, in respect of which it only provides services. ASR is a party
     to the joint venture behind the Brand New Day PPI (for which ASR covers the biometric risks).
138  Market shares (GWP, source Form CO) as follows: 2015: NN DC [10-20]%, NN PPI [10-20]%,
     Delta Lloyd DC [20-30]%, Delta Lloyd PPI [10-20]%; 2016: NN DC [10-20]%, NN PPI [20-30]%,
     Delta Lloyd DC [20-30]%, Delta Lloyd PPI [20-30]%.
139  Source: Form CO. It should be noted that PPIs set up by non-insurers usually involve the
     participation of an insurer, as the PPI itself cannot bear the biometric risk. The PPIs set up by Towers
     Watson and Robeco (an asset manager), for example, both have contracts with Achmea.
                                                          47


246. The Notifying Party contends that market shares based on gross written premium
     (GWP) do not provide a true reflection of the strength of the various providers
     active on the market. It explains that companies such as Allianz, which have only
     recently entered the market, do not appear to be significant players when the market
     is assessed based on GWP, because GWP captures both the retention of customers
     from the accumulation phase and the acquisition of new customers for
     decumulation. Market shares based on NWP reflect only the acquisition of new
     decumulation customers and therefore, in the Notifying Party’s view, provide a
     more accurate representation of competitors’ relative positions on the market.
247. Further to the above, the Notifying Party indicates that it would expect NN’s market
     share based on NWP to be less than [5-10]%. On the basis of market intelligence,
     the Notifying Party also believes Allianz and Vivat (through its brands Reaal and
     Zwitserleven) to have performed particularly strongly in 2016.
248. The Notifying Party submits that the market for decumulation products is volatile,
     as illustrated by the relatively significant change in NN and Delta Lloyd’s respective
     market shares between 2014 and 2015. In the Notifying Party’s view, this is a
     consequence of customers’ increasing tendency to shop around for their annuity and
     to compare offers from various providers. The Notifying Party estimates that
     customers representing approximately [20-30]% of capital choose to change
     provider at the point of purchasing an annuity (i.e. purchase an annuity from a
     provider other than the provider of their DC scheme), and expects this to increase in
     the coming years as individuals now reaching retirement age are accustomed to
     using price comparison sites.
249. The Notifying Party also observes, however, that customers with higher levels of
     capital are more likely to switch provider, as they will have more to gain by doing
     so. This means that, whilst customers accounting for [20-30]% of capital may
     switch providers, the actual percentage of customers switching is likely to be even
     lower. This is reflected in the figures provided by the Notifying Party on the Parties’
     DC customers. Of NN’s DC customers, approximately [10-20]% by number,
     representing [30-40]% of capital, chose to purchase an annuity from a provider
     other than NN in 2016.140 Of Delta Lloyd’s customers, approximately [30-40]% by
     number and [40-50]% in terms of value of capital switched to a new provider for
     their annuity in 2016.141
250. Given that, until very recently, PPIs were not able to offer their own decumulation
     products but could distribute annuities from other providers, it would be reasonable
     to expect that insurers’ PPIs would also serve as a source of business for the
     insurer’s own annuities. This seems to be true to a certain extent for NN and Delta
     Lloyd, as the Parties do capture far more of the decumulation business from their
     PPI customers than their respective market positions would suggest, i.e. more than
     they would be expected to in case all their PPI customers were shopping around.
     Nonetheless, the amount of retained business is not as high as for the insurers own
     DC customers, implying that PPI customers perhaps do not see the insurer as ‘their’
     provider, or are by nature more inclined to shop around. Of NN’s PPI customers,
140  The equivalent percentages for 2014 and 2015 for NN are as follows: 2014: [5-10]% of customers,
     [5-10]% of capital; 2015: [10-20]% of customers, [30-40]% of capital.
141  The equivalent percentages for 2014 and 2015 for Delta Lloyd are as follows: 2014: [20-30]% of
     customers, [30-40]% of capital; 2015: [10-20]% of customers, [20-30]% of capital.
                                                      49

     approximately [30-40]% (representing [50-60]% of capital) bought an annuity from
     a different provider (i.e. not from NN) in 2016. In 2015, however this was only [20-
     30]%, representing [10-20]% of capital. Of Delta Lloyd’s PPI customers,
     approximately[80-90]% (representing [80-90]% of capital) bought an annuity from
     a different provider (i.e. not from Delta Lloyd) in 2016. In 2015, the proportion of
     customers switching was lower, at [40-50]%, representing [60-70]% of capital.
251. The results of the market investigation confirmed that customers have a very strong
     tendency to stay with the same provider between the accumulation and
     decumulation phases of a DC scheme.
252. Approximately two thirds of competitors stated that customers of their DC schemes
     would be likely to purchase an annuity from them on reaching retirement.142 The
     main reason for this, according to competitors, is the ease and convenience of
     purchasing from the same provider. The current provider will typically send the
     customer information on its annuities a couple of months before the retirement date,
     and simply accepting this offer is by far the simplest course of action. As such,
     customers feel that they have not had to make an active choice. Competitors also
     mentioned that some customers find it reassuring to purchase from a provider they
     know. In addition, a couple of respondents acknowledged that insurers often offer
     different prices for ‘internal’ and ‘external’ customers, meaning that staying with
     the same provider is often the most attractive option. One competitor also stated that
     the differences between the various providers’ offers, in particular in terms of price,
     are not significant enough to motivate customers to switch. In this competitor’s
     opinion, customers generally only move to a different provider if they have several
     pension pots to combine. A small number of competitors (typically those outside the
     six major insurers) did, however, state that clients are likely to shop around for the
     best offer.143
253. The Parties’ main competitors typically estimated that around 20-30% of customers
     switch to another provider when purchasing an annuity, which is roughly in line
     with the information provided by the Notifying Party. One main competitor did also
     express the view that customers’ switching behaviour may change in the coming
     years,144 which would seem to support the Notifying Party’s argument that
     customers are becoming more active in shopping around for the best offer.
254. The responses provided by pension product distributors were largely in line with
     those of competitors. They estimated that between 75% and 90% of customers
     remain with the same provider for the decumulation phase.145 The reasons
     mentioned were largely similar to those given by competitors, but distributors also
     emphasised the costs associated with changing and customers’ perception that this is
     a more risky choice.146 One distributor also mentioned customers’ unwillingness to
     pay for advice as a reason for the overwhelming tendency to purchase the annuity
     offered to them by the provider of the DC scheme. This suggests that relatively few
     employers pay for their employees to receive advice, and also that individuals do
142  Q15 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
143  Q15.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
144  Q16.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
145  Q17 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
146  Q17.1 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products. Employees find it difficult to compare
     between different providers and feel staying where they are is the safest and easiest choice.
                                                       50

     not generally have the expertise or confidence to make the decision to change
     providers independently. This respondent did, however, also comment that the
     number of DC scheme members looking for advice is growing. Two distributors
     also highlighted that communication with scheme members is becoming a more
     important part of the role of actuarial consultants responsible for DC schemes, and
     that employees are being provided with more information, thus allowing them to
     make a more informed choice.147
255. One distributor also mentioned that more highly educated employees, and particular
     those working in the financial industry, are more inclined to shop around for an
     annuity.148 This is generally consistent with the Notifying Party’s view that
     customers with a higher value pension pot are more likely to compare providers.
256. The responses to the market investigation therefore confirm that a high proportion
     of customers purchase an annuity from the provider of their DC scheme, without
     really shopping around to compare other offers. This clearly gives competitors that
     are strong in DC accumulation products an advantage in the decumulation market.
     Nonetheless, it would not be correct to assume that insurers’ positions on the DC
     accumulation market are necessarily replicated in decumulation. NN, for example,
     had a market share of 18% in DC accumulation in 2015 but only [10-20]% in
     decumulation, and Vivat accounted for [20-30]% of the DC accumulation market,
     but only won [5-15]% of business in decumulation.
257. The nature of an annuity product would tend to mean that customers who do shop
     around, whether independently or with the help of an advisor, are likely to choose
     primarily on the basis of price, i.e. simply by comparing the benefits that different
     providers could offer for a certain level of accumulated capital. The Notifying Party
     submits that the low proportion of new business won by NN is a result of its
     relatively uncompetitive rates for annuities in recent years, which appears to be
     borne out by data from a comparison site for annuities provided by the Notifying
     Party. As can be seen in table 11, NN rarely appears in the top three providers for
     annuities being paid out from 1 January 2017, with Delta Lloyd, Vivat and De
     Goudse consistently having the best offers. For an annuity to be paid out from
     January 2018, meanwhile, NN is amongst the top providers, but Delta Lloyd no
     longer appears, while Allianz also features strongly. Overall, the movement in the
     top three providers would appear to confirm that the proportion of new business
     won by different insurers can fluctuate significantly over a relatively short period of
     time. Furthermore, the presence of competitors such as De Goudse and Allianz
     amongst the providers with the most attractive offers shows that insurers from
     outside the ‘big six’, i.e. the main providers of accumulation products, can still
     compete effectively in the decumulation market.
147  Q17 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
148  Q17.2 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
                                                       51

      Table 11: DC decumulation schemes (fixed annuity products), GWP
Distribution as of:     Benefits paid                 Top three providers (in order)
                           Monthly          Delta Lloyd             Vivat      De Goudse/NN
  1 January 2017          Quarterly         Delta Lloyd             Vivat        De Goudse
                           Annually             Vivat             De Goudse      Delta Lloyd
                           Monthly               NN                Allianz          Vivat
  1 January 2018          Quarterly              NN                Allianz          Vivat
                           Annually            Allianz               NN             Vivat
Source: www.pensioenkoers.nl149
258. In view of the above, there would also appear to be little reason to suppose that
      Delta Lloyd and NN are particularly close competitors in the market for
      decumulation. Any of the main competitors may have the best offer at a particular
      point in time, and other characteristics of the provider are unlikely to play a
      significant role in customers’ choices. This is largely confirmed by data on
      customers switching between the Parties. Of customers switching away from NN for
      the decumulation phase, [10-20]% purchased an annuity from Delta Lloyd in
      2016.150 Of customers leaving Delta Lloyd, [5-10]% purchased an annuity from NN
      in 2016.151 These figures are fairly consistent with the Parties’ overall market
      position, and potentially even slightly lower than might be expected.
259. In conclusion, although the merged will have a relatively strong position on the
      market for decumulation products (fixed annuities), with a market share of just
      below [30-40]%, there will remain at least five other competitors active, including
      Aegon which will have a similar market share. The proportion of new business won
      by the various competitors appears to fluctuate quite significantly, according to
      which providers have the best offers at a particular point in time, and it is therefore
      possible for newer, smaller providers to compete effectively on the market.
      Furthermore, the general expectation seems to be that customers will be better
      informed about their choices on retirement and will increasingly shop around for
      their annuity, meaning that the advantage associated with being a strong provider in
      the DC accumulation market will lessen over the coming years.
260. In view of the above, the Commission concludes that the Transaction does not raise
      serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market as regards DC
      decumulation fixed annuity products.
      A product market including fixed and variable annuities
261. NN started offering variable annuities on 1 January 2017, and, at the time of
      notification, Delta Lloyd planned to introduce its product on 1 March 2017. Both
149   The Notifying Party used the comparison website www.pensioenkoers.nl to generate the expected
      returns on accumulated capital. Pensioenkoers.nl does not yet compare the offerings of all providers
      in the Netherlands and there may therefore be other providers which distribute benefits based on the
      accumulated capital criteria chosen for which results were not available. The website was accessed,
      and comparisons made, on 14 December 2016, on the basis of a male individual born on 1 January
      1950, with accumulated pension capital of EUR 250 000, EUR 500 000, EUR 1 000 000 and
      EUR 1 500 000 (results averaged), which has been accumulated at an “other/unknown” company and
      for direct distribution on the dates as given in the table.
150   The equivalent figures for 2014 and 2015 are [10-20]% and [40-50]% respectively. Although the
      figure for 2015 is somewhat higher than might be expected, this would seem to reflect the general
      fluctuation in providers’ share of new business as referred to above. In 2014, for example, [40-50]%
      of NN’s lost customers moved to Aegon.
151   The equivalent figures for 2014 and 2015 are [10-20]% and [10-20]% respectively.
                                                            52

     Aegon and Allianz have also already launched variable annuities, and Zwitserleven,
     which currently offers its variable annuity only to customers of its PPI, will make
     this available to switching customers as of January 2018. Other providers are also
     expected to enter the market. The main differentiating factors between providers’
     offers are the risk level (i.e. the level of equity exposure) and the structure of the
     product (in terms of how the variable annuity is converted into a fixed annuity).
     Some products also allow customers to combine fixed and variable annuities, such
     that they retain part of the fixed pension payments that they would have received
     under a fixed annuity, and effectively only take a risk with the remaining proportion
     of their pension. The main specificity of NN’s variable annuity is that it insures
     customers against changes in life expectancy, and it transfers the capital gradually
     into a fixed annuity, thus reducing the risk level progressively. Delta Lloyd’s
     variable annuity product will include a fixed benefit, and will give the customer the
     choice between different levels of risk.
262. The Notifying Party points out that the introduction of variable annuities will widen
     the market, as competitors such as PPIs, which are not able to offer fixed annuities,
     can now enter the market. The Notifying Party also mentions that variable annuities
     may change the nature of competition: whilst on the market for fixed annuities,
     providers compete on a range of characteristics, of which price (or the level of
     benefit offered for a certain amount of capital) is only one, alongside more
     qualitative aspects such as customer service, competition amongst providers of
     variable annuities is expected to be more strongly focused on the financial benefits.
     The nature of the product means that the providers’ investment expertise is more
     relevant, and the Notifying Party expects companies with a good track record in this
     area to have an advantage.
263. The market investigation confirmed that a number of the main insurance companies
     already offer both variable and fixed annuities, and that others, including PPIs, are
     planning to enter this market.152
264. A number of responses to the market investigation suggested that the introduction of
     variable annuities may further contribute to the trend of employers providing more
     support to employees in their choice of annuity. The overall choice available to
     customers will increase as more providers start offering variable annuities and this
     may increase the level of communication around the selection of annuities.153
265. On the other hand, a small minority of respondents was of the opinion that variable
     annuities would increase the probability that customers stay with their current
     provider, as the customer has to start making choices in relation to the annuity much
     longer in advance of retirement.154 This does not, however, prevent the customer
     from switching at retirement, should they wish to.
266. It should be acknowledged that variable annuities will not be considered a realistic
     choice by all customers, even if they are considered part of the same product market
     as fixed annuities. Competitors confirmed that fixed and variable annuities have
152  Q8.1 and Q9 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
153  Q17.2 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
154  Q15.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors. We expect that due to DC with variable annuities
     individual customers will be more likely to stay. The main reason for this is that the journey starts
     long before retirement age and goes on after retirement age.
                                                       53

     quite different characteristics155 and that variable annuities may only be attractive to
     certain types of customers (typically those who are better informed and can afford to
     accept a certain level of risk)156 or in certain circumstances (e.g. if the customer also
     has a DB pension)157. Nonetheless, even for customers who only consider fixed
     annuities, the choice of products available which meet their needs would not be
     narrower on a wider market for fixed and variable annuities than it is on a market
     for fixed annuities only.
267. In conclusion, competition on a market for either variable annuities or for all
     decumulation products (including both variable and fixed annuities) will always be
     at least as strong as on a market for fixed annuities, and is likely to include a wider
     range of competitors, due to the fact that PPIs can also offer variable annuities. In
     view of this, it is highly unlikely that the merged entity would have a stronger
     position on a market including variable annuities than it does on the market for fixed
     annuities. Being amongst the first providers to have launched variable annuities, NN
     and Delta Lloyd may capture a relatively high proportion of new business in the
     very short term, but as other competitors enter the market, this is likely to fall to
     similar or lower levels than their market shares in the market for fixed annuities.
268. In conclusion, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not give rise to
     serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in respect of a
     hypothetical market for DC decumulation products including fixed and variable
     annuities, or variable annuities only.
        V.1.A.5 Possible market for annuities
269. As mentioned in the product market definitions, it would also be possible to
     envisage a wider market for annuities, including all annuities provided in pillar 2
     and pillar 3. Within pillar 2 (i.e. DC decumulation), the standard product is an
     immediate pension (direct ingaande pensioen, DIP), and within pillar 3 (individual
     life insurance) there are both traditional life insurance annuities (direct ingaande
     lijfrente, DIL) and annuities from within the new banking products (banksparen)
     available. Customers can only purchase pillar 2 annuities with the capital
     accumulated in a DC scheme whilst pillar 3 annuities can be purchased either with
     capital they have accumulated in a pillar 3 savings product (most commonly a
     lijfrenteverzekering), or with capital they have available independently of pillar 2 or
     pillar 3 savings
270. Table 12 shows the Parties combined market shares on a hypothetical overall
     market for annuities.
155  Q36 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
156  Q9 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products  and Q36 of Questionnaire 1 to
     competitors.
157  Q37 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                  54





     still sell in this area are term-life policies, and to a much lesser extent annuities.160
     The reasons they give for this change largely mirror those put forward by the
     Notifying Party, namely changes in legislation (including new rules banning
     commission on insurance sales), reduction of fiscal incentives, loss of trust in
     financial institutions and the introduction of banksparen.161 Thus, the respondents to
     the market investigation generally confirmed that the market for traditional savings
     and investment products is becoming less relevant.
288. In responses to the market investigation NN and Delta Lloyd were both mentioned a
     number of times by competitors as being amongst the top five players in individual
     life insurance, but they were not consistently the highest placed, nor were they
     mentioned more frequently than other competitors (including Vivat, Aegon, ASR
     and Achmea). Distributors also named a wide range of competitors active in this
     area, including, in addition to those already mentioned, Allianz, Amersfoorste,
     Generali and Legal&General.162 Most distributors considered Aegon to be NN’s
     main competitor on the individual life insurance market, whilst NN and Aegon were
     mentioned equally often as Delta Lloyd’s main competitor.163
289. Competitors indicated that it could be difficult to switch providers for some of the
     older style savings and investment policies, in particular for tax reasons. This means
     that a customer is often obliged to go to an advisor, which can significantly increase
     the cost of switching.164 Distributors views on the difficulties associated with
     switching were quite varied, but most confirmed that it would be possible, even if it
     would entail additional costs.165
290. A small number of competitors were of the opinion that the Transaction could have
     an impact on the market for individual life insurance. Their responses mainly,
     however, generically referred to the fact that the merged entity would become the
     largest player, and that it is preferable to have more, and evenly-matched players.
     The only concern which related specifically to savings and investment products and
     annuities was about the fact that companies are stopping offering some of the
     products from under the old tax regime. Customers of these products are not always
     able to switch to the new regime, and so with fewer providers offering the old-style
     products, they could see their choice reduced. NN’s (pre-Transaction) decision to
     stop offering these products was therefore considered to have a negative effect on
     customers’ choice.166 Whilst this may be true, this was a decision taken by NN prior
     to the Transaction does not therefore threaten to further reduce choice.
291. A significant number of competitors emphasised the need for consolidation in this
     market, in particular in view of the fact that the market has already shrunk
     significantly. A number of competitors also commented that there will remain
160  Q82 and Q82.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
161  Q82.2 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
162  Q7 of Questionnaire 4 to distributors of individual life and non-life insurance.
163  Q21.1 and Q22.1 of Questionnaire 4 to distributors of individual life and non-life insurance.
164  Q94 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
165  Q15, Q15.1 and Q15.2 of Questionnaire 4 to distributors of individual life and non-life insurance.
166  Q99.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                        59

     sufficient choice.167 The vast majority of distributors also confirmed that there is
     plenty of choice available on the individual life insurance market.168
292. One respondent referred to NN and Delta Lloyd being direct competitors in savings
      and investment products and annuities. This distributor described Delta Lloyd as an
      “innovator” and a “challenger”, and therefore sees the loss of Delta Lloyd as
      harmful for the market. 169 As discussed in section V.1.D above, it is doubtful
      whether Delta Lloyd is still really playing the role of innovator, in view of [Delta
      Lloyd's business strategy]. Furthermore, in view of the fact that the market for
      traditional savings and investment products has shrunk so considerably in recent
      years, it is not certain that any insurer would really be looking to innovate or to win
      new business at all in this specific market.
293. Finally, as confirmed by the results of the market investigation, even if the relevant
     market were to comprise only the traditional insurance savings and investment
     products, it is clear that the neighbouring market of banksparen will exert a
     competitive pressure on this narrowly defined market.
294. In conclusion therefore, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
     significantly impede effective competition on product markets limited respectively
     to savings and investment products and annuities.
295. As regards the individual life insurance market including banksparen, the
     Commission notes the following.
296. Firstly, it can be noted that the merged entity has a relatively modest position on the
     combined markets including traditional life insurance and banksparen – around [20-
     30]% on the accumulation market and around [20-30]% on the decumulation
     market. The market investigation confirmed the Notifying Party’s claims that the
     large Dutch banks, in particular ABN Amro, Rabobank and SNS are all strong
     competitors in banksparen. Respondents to the market investigation mentioned both
     banks and insurers as amongst the top competitors in banksparen, and Rabobank
     and ABN Amro were often mentioned as the strongest players.170
297. On wider accumulation and decumulation markets comprising traditional insurance
     products and banksparen, the merged entity will therefore face a much wider range
     of competitors, including not only the other major insurers but also the major Dutch
     banks, which have an established reputation and strong customer base.
298. Lastly, given that there is not deemed to be any significant threat to competition on
     the narrower markets for savings and investment products and for annuities (within
     traditional life insurance), as described above, and that the markets in question here
     are wider markets, where the merged entity will have a lower market share and face
     a wider range of strong competitors, it seems clear that the Transaction cannot
     create any concerns on these hypothetical markets.
167  Q120.2 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
168  Q15.3 of Questionnaire 4 to distributors of individual life and non-life insurance.
169 A small number of distributors suggested that the Transaction could have an impact on the market for
     individual life insurance, mentioning reduced choice and increased prices, but without providing any
     further explanation. Q29 and Q29.1 of Questionnaire 4 to distributors of individual life and non-life
     insurance.
170 Q89 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                        60

299. In conclusion therefore, there does not appear to be any reason to suppose that the
      Transaction would threaten to significantly impede effective competition on product
      markets comprising savings and investment insurance products and banksparen
      products.
300. The market investigation also revealed that the Transaction could not significantly
      impede effective competition in the market limited to banksparen products only.
301. As submitted by the Notifying Party there is a wide range of competitors active in
      the market for banksparen, including a number of competitors that are sufficiently
      large to exert competitive pressure on the merged entity, in particular Aegon,
      Achmea, ABN Amro, SNS Bank and Rabobank. 171
302. The Commission notes, furthermore that it is objectively true that the market for
      banksparen is open to a much wider range of competitors than the traditional
      individual life insurance market, as both insurers (through their banking
      subsidiaries) and banks can offer these products.
303. The vast majority of respondents to the market investigation were of the opinion
      that the Transaction would not have any impact on the market for banksparen and
      majority of respondents confirmed that there would still be plenty of choice.172 173 It
      is clear that there will remain sufficient competitors active to ensure a wide choice
      of products for consumers, and that the merged entity’s position would not be such
      as to allow it to in any way control prices on the market.
304. In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
      significantly impede effective competition on product markets limited respectively
      to accumulation and decumulation products, both including traditional life insurance
      and banksparen products.
         V.1.C. Non-life insurance
305. The Commission has in past cases tended to consider separate markets within non-
      life insurance according to the different risks covered, whilst also acknowledging,
      from a supply-side perspective, the quite similar conditions for insuring some types
      of risks, as explained in section III.2.B.
306. In the Netherlands, the number of players active in the market for non-life insurance
      is higher than for life-insurance, leading to a relatively more fragmented market
      structure.
307. On the overall market for non-life insurance, the Parties’ combined market shares is
      [10-20]% in 2015 and remains below 20% over the period 2013-2015 in terms of
      GWP. Post-transaction, the combined entity would become second-largest player,
171 Q89 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
172 Q29.1 of Questionnaire 4 to distributors of individual life and non-life insurance.
173 One respondent expressed concern about the loss of Delta Lloyd from the banksparen market,
    describing Delta Lloyd as an “innovator” and a “challenger” (Q29 and Q29.1 of Questionnaire 4 to
    distributors of individual life and non-life insurance). It is noted that Delta Lloyd market share in
    banksparen remains modest (around [5-10]%) and it is doubtful that whether Delta Lloyd is still really
    playing the role of an innovator and aggressive competitor, in view of [Delta Lloyd's business
    strategy].
                                                        61


     available (2014 or 2015 as displayed in table 21) and in the respective sub-segments
     for individual or group customers, remain, however, very similar to the figures
     provided in table 21 (with the highest combined market share of [20-30]% occurring
     in individual fire insurance in 2014, based on NWP). Neither of the Parties is active
     in the market for travel insurance provided to corporate entities.
311. As can be seen from table 21, the merged entity would have moderate combined
     market shares (never exceeding [20-30]%) and would continue to face strong
     competition in non-life insurance overall and in each of the hypothetical segments
     considered in table 21. In each of the segments considered for the purpose of the
     present case except disability insurance, the combined entity and Achmea would
     become the two largest competitors, and would be of similar size. In disability
     insurance, the combined entity would become the largest player, closely followed
     by ASR and Achmea. A significant number of smaller players, some of which are
     specialised in specific types of non-life insurance, will also continue to exert
     competitive pressure on the merged entity post-transaction.
312. The majority of respondents to the market investigation confirm that the Transaction
     would have only a limited impact on the market for non-life insurance, as there will
     still be sufficient suppliers active on the market, and customers will continue to
     benefit from a choice of products.175 Some competitors even consider that “a
     combination of these two parties is expected to lead to large synergy effects, which
     means that they will become more competitive. These could put downward pressure
     on the commercial tariffs in the market and therefore on the profitability”176 or,
     similarly, that “the transaction will lead to further consolidation with the Dutch
     non-life insurance market. Processes of Delta Lloyd are potentially further
     automated, driving cost down. Other insurers will be forced to follow, but especially
     smaller insurers will struggle and potentially be acquired by larger firms”.177
313. A small number of competitors and distributors did, however, highlight the fact that
     the merged entity will become an important player in the market for non-life
     insurance due to its relatively high market share and the already limited number of
     providers. A minority of distributors feared that the transaction will reduce choice
     on the non-life insurance market, one also adding that the gap created by the loss of
     Delta Lloyd is unlikely to be filled by another player. In addition, a distributor
     voiced a particular concern about the potential effect of the transaction on the
     market for underwriting178, where it expects to see a reduction in competition. It
     should be noted that the Commission has never considered sales by mandated
     brokers as a distinct channel, and from the point of view of the end customer, a
     reduction in the choice on offer via one particular distribution channel could not be
     seen to be particularly harmful when a number of other distribution channels are all
     open and just as easily accessible (e.g. independent intermediaries, online platforms,
     banks and direct sales from the insurer).179
175  Q120.3 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors. “There would remain a sufficient number of suppliers and
     customers would continue to enjoy sufficient choice.” “there are still – enough – competitors left”.
176  Q120.3 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
177  Q120.3 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
178  A mandated broker distributes insurance policies on behalf of an insurance company and with the
     risk borne by the insurance company, but under the mandated broker’s own brand.
179  Q30 and Q30.1 of Questionnaire 4 to distributors on individual life and non-life insurance.
                                                       63

314. More generally, the comments referred to above relating to a potential reduction in
     choice and competition appear to be unsubstantiated, in particular given the large
     number of providers active on the non-life insurance market. Moreover, the DNB’s
     recent study of the insurance market180 reports that non-life premiums have been
     under considerable pressure in recent years and are expected to fall further, which
     suggests that competition is strong. The DNB also predicts that technological
     changes allowing insurers to better assess risks will increase competition, as will the
     entry on the market of more international competitors.
315. In view of the above, and in particular of the merged entity’s relatively limited
     combined market share on the market for non-life insurance and on the possible
     sub-segments of this market (never exceeding [20-30]%), the Commission considers
     that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
     internal market as regards the market for non-life insurance or any of its
     hypothetical sub-segments for liability, disability, fire and travel insurance
     considered in overall or further segmented into individual and group customers.
        V.1.D. Delta Lloyd’s overall position on the insurance market
316. In general, the market investigation confirmed that there will remain sufficient
     choice for customers on the insurance market following the merger, even though the
     loss of Delta Lloyd will inevitably reduce the number of competitors. With regard to
     pension products, customers mentioned the introduction of new pension vehicles as
     a development which has increased the choice of products available. In individual
     life insurance, meanwhile, many of the traditional products have been replaced by
     new types of products sold under a banking licence, which has, again, significantly
     widened the range of competitors on the market. Lastly, the market for non-life
     insurance is already more fragmented, and the merged entity would have a more
     modest combined market share.
317. Notwithstanding the above, a small number of respondents to the market
     investigation expressed concern that the loss of Delta Lloyd could be particularly
     damaging to the market due to the role that Delta Lloyd has played as an innovator
     and as an aggressive competitor on price. A minority of pension product customers
     considered Delta Lloyd, and particularly its PPI, to be very price competitive181 in
     this market, and distributors of individual life and non-life policies also mentioned
     price as one of the company’s strengths.182 A small number of distributors (of
     pension products and life insurance) also commented on Delta Lloyd’s innovative
     “NN and Delta Lloyd are both big players on the non-life-insurance market. The takeover will see
     one of them disappear and, if the trend seen in recent years continues, the gap will not be filled by
     new players. Given that they both offer a wide range of products, the merger will have an effect on
     virtually all available products. In particular, we want to stress the impact on the market for
     underwriting. Due to the reduction in the number of providers and also a certain homogeneity in
     market behaviour, this market already started becoming less competitive a little while ago. The
     takeover therefore has two consequences: the combination of NN and Delta Lloyd will become very
     dominant in terms of market share and competition will be further reduced.”
180  DNB, Visie op de toekomst van de Nederlandse verzekeringssector, December 2016,
     http://www.dnb nl/binaries/DNBrapport%20Visie%20op%20de%20toekomst%20van%20de%20ver
     zekringssector,%2013%20december%202016_tcm46-350191.pdf?2016121317.
181  Q21.3 and Q21.4 of Questionnaire 2.
182  Q20.1 of Questionnaire 4.
                                                      64

     capabilities.183 A distributor of individual life insurance, suggested that “the impact
     of the transaction will be all the greater because Delta Lloyd has in recent years
     shown itself to be a challenger and an innovator”.184
318. In view of these comments, the Commission further investigated whether there
     would be grounds to consider that Delta Lloyd is able to exert an influence on
     competition over and above what would be suggested by its market share.
319. The Commission notes first that the comments mentioned above should be
     interpreted within the context of market participants’ overall view on the
     Transaction, which is that it is expected to have no or only a very limited impact on
     the market. In particular, even the pension products distributor who suggested that
     Delta Lloyd could have been an innovative supplier in fact also stated that the
     overall impact of the transaction would be “limited”. Other responses also suggested
     that the importance of Delta Lloyd as an innovative and low-priced competitor
     might not be what it once was, due to changes in both Delta Lloyd’s own position
     and in the market more generally. One distributor, for example, explains that Delta
     Lloyd used to be a “price fighter”, specifically in DB, but that as this market is
     disappearing anyway, the effect of the Transaction will be “almost marginal”.185 A
     distributor also comments that Delta Lloyd is not seen as a top player in any
     particular market.186
320. Most importantly, Delta Lloyd demonstrated that its reputation as an innovative
      competitor must be based, to some extent at least, […]. In an additional submission
      provided on 17 March 2017, Delta Lloyd demonstrated that, [Delta Lloyd's
      business strategy]. Contemporary internal documents provided by Delta Lloyd187
      confirm that it [Delta Lloyd's strategic decision]. Delta Lloyd also provided reports
      conducted by independent consultants which show that [strategic assessment].188
      Further internal documents provided by Delta Lloyd showed that the company has,
      at various points, considered [strategic assessment].189
321. In addition to the above, Delta Lloyd also argues that the strong regulation around
     pensions and insurance products means that it would be difficult for any one
     competitor to achieve any kind of innovation which others could not also easily
     replicate. Delta Lloyd considers its attractiveness as a brand to be based on its level
     of service and good relationships with customers and advisors rather than on
     particular innovations or having the lowest prices.
322. In view of the above, the Commission considers that the isolated concerns expressed
     by some market participants, as described in recital 317 above, do not seem to
     reflect the reality of the current situation on the market. This conclusion is
183  Q43.1 of Questionnaire 3.
184  Q29.1 of Questionnaire 4.
185  Q34.4 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products. “DL was a price fighter in the market
     for insured DB, so the bottom pricing is taken out of the market. However, since we expect insured
     DB plans to be replaced by soft DB plans (APFs/BPFs) or DC plans, the actual impact will be
     almost marginal”.
186  Q34.4 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products. “NN and DL have not been excelling in
     any markets”.
187  Including a strategy document from November 2015 and a presentation to investors from May 2016.
188  Reports by Schenkel & Verschuren and Moneyview.
189  Commercial analysis of Delta Lloyd’s DC product.
                                                       65


327. It should be noted that insurance services provided to PPIs and APFs have not been
     considered as part of this market. Where PPIs and APFs are part of insurance groups
     (as is the case for the majority of APFs and around half of the PPIs currently active
     on the market), insurance is almost always provided by the group itself, e.g. NN
     provides insurance to its PPI and its APF. Whilst some insurers do also provide
     insurance to third party PPIs and APFs, neither NN nor Delta Lloyd is active in this
     area. Both only provide insurance services to their own PPI and APF, and do not
     therefore compete on a genuine market for the provision of such services.
328. The Notifying Party submits that the sourcing of insurance by pension funds has
      been declining rapidly in recent years, and that the Parties have also seen their
      premiums reduce. The Notifying Party adds that [Parties' market position] for
      providing insurance to pension funds in 2016.
329. The figures for the overall market size appear to confirm that the market has shrunk
     rapidly, almost halving in size between 2013 and 2015. In addition, the merged
     entity will not be the largest player on the market, as Aegon will have a
     considerably larger market share of [50-60]%.
330. The results of the market investigation did not suggest that the proposed transaction
     would have any significant effect on the market for insurance services provided to
     pension funds. Not all of the pension funds used an external provider for
     insurance,191 suggesting that there are alternative ways of setting up the pension
     funds, and the vast majority stated that there was sufficient choice of service
     providers available (for insurance, asset management and pensions
     administration).192
331. Just over half of the pension funds which responded to the market investigation
     stated that it would be difficult for them to change provider, mainly due to
     contractual terms, however, rather than to any reduction in choice which may come
     about as a result of the merger.193 They generally had fairly little knowledge of the
     providers active on the market, but a couple mentioned elipsLife (owned by Swiss
     Re) and Zwitserleven (Vivat) amongst the companies they would consider. The
     Parties’ competitors also seemed to have fairly limited knowledge of this market,
     but elipsLife and Zwitserleven were again mentioned ahead of NN and Delta Lloyd
     (which were named only once)194, suggesting that the Parties’ strength on this
     market may be declining, as claimed. Only one pension fund suggested that the
     transaction might have any effect on the market for insurance services to pension
     funds, and this opinion was not substantiated beyond commenting on the size of the
     merged entity.195 No competitors thought that the transaction would have any
     effect.196
332. In view of the above, it would appear that the proposed transaction does not give
     rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in relation to
     the hypothetical market for insurance services to pension providers.
191  Q7.1 of Questionnaire 5 to pension funds.
192  Q10 of Questionnaire 5 to pension funds.
193  Q8 of Questionnaire 5 to pension funds.
194  Q52 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
195  Q11.1 of Questionnaire 5 to pension funds.
196  Q54 and Q54.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                      67

        V.1.F.    Buy-outs
333. Both NN and Delta Lloyd are active on the market for buy-outs.197
334. In the Netherlands, the type of pension funds that would be interested in a buy-out
     are primarily company pension funds (ondernemingspensioenfondsen, OPFs), and to
     a lesser extent industry pension funds (bedrijfstakpensioenfonds, BPF). An OPF
     would, however, also have a number of other options, such as joining an algemeen
     pensioenfonds (APF) or a bedrijfstakpensioenfonds (BPF). A BPF could also merge
     with another BPF.
335. The Notifying Party claims that a buy-out is usually more expensive for a pension
     fund than joining an APF. This is because, when a pension fund is transferred to an
     insurer, the insurer would take on the assets and liabilities on the basis of providing
     the scheme members with a guaranteed level of pension benefits. When a pension
     fund joins an APF, however, the benefits could be cut if at some point in the future
     the APF does not have sufficient funding. A buy-out is therefore more expensive, as
     the pension fund is effectively paying the insurer to take on the longevity and
     investment risk associated with its obligations.
336. A pension fund considering a buy-out is required under Dutch legislation to
     organise a tender process, whereby at least three providers would submit their
     proposals, specifying the single premium to be transferred by the pension fund. The
     pension fund would then choose the most advantageous offer. This process is
     usually organised by an actuarial consultant (or other broker), who would publicise
     the opportunity and negotiate with insurers.
337. The Notifying Party claims that there has been relatively limited buy-out activity in
     recent years, and no activity in 2016, due to the low interest rates seen over this
     period. It also argues that the introduction of APFs in 2016 has created an
     alternative to buy-outs, and therefore contributed to the decline seen in this market.
     Further reasons for the lack of activity on the buy-out market put forward by the
     Notifying Party include insurers’ low solvency ratios and the coverage ratios of
     OPFs, which are sometimes below the regulatory minimum for transferring assets
     and liabilities. Recent statistics seem, however, to suggest that all of the main six
     Dutch insurers have solvency ratios well above the minimum required level, with
     NN having the highest solvency ratio by some distance, at a level more than
     comfortably above the regulatory minimum.
338. Buy-outs can be of interest to insurance companies as they offer a way of acquiring
     a relatively large volume of assets in a single transaction, which the company can
     then invest. Buy-outs of DC arrangements may be particularly attractive, as
     solvency and capital requirements for buy-outs of this kind are not such as to restrict
     any insurer’s ability to compete in the tender.
339. In addition, the insurance company also acquires new customers as it would
     typically take on the future accrual for the pension scheme (providing, of course,
     there are still active members in the scheme). A buy-out does, however, entail a
     certain level of risk, and an insurer will take this into account when deciding
197  Both are active exclusively as insurers, i.e. their respective PPIs and APFs have not carried out any
     buy-outs.
                                                          68

      whether to compete in a particular tender. Its assessment of the risk level will
      typically be based on the size and demographics of the scheme and the capital
      accrued. In deciding whether to compete for a buy-out, an insurer would also need
      to consider its own financial situation.
 340. Although the buy-out market has not seen a lot of activity in the last couple of
      years, NN and Delta Lloyd are both present on this market. Due to the volatile
      nature of the market, we have looked at market shares over a period of five years,
      2011-2015. [Confidential information about buy-outs in 2016].
     Table 23: Market shares in the market for buy-outs, 2011-2016
   Year              2011                 2012                2013                 2014                      2015                  2016
               No. of     Market    No. of     Market    No. of    Market    No. of       Market   No. of buy-      Market   No. of buy-   Market
              buy-outs    shares   buy-outs    shares   buy-outs   shares   buy-outs      shares                    shares                 shares
                                                                                                      outs                      outs
                                                                                                                               [
                                    […                              [0-                                             [20-                    [0-
    NN        […]        [0-5]%               [0-5]%    […]                 […]          [0-5]%    […]                         …
                                     ]                             5]%                                              30]%                   5]%
                                                                                                                               ]
                                                                                                                               [
                          [60-      […        [10-                 [20-                    [10-                                             [0-
Delta Lloyd   […]                                       […]                 […]                    […]             [0-5]%      …
                         70]%        ]        20]%                 30]%                   20]%                                             5]%
                                                                                                                               ]
                          [60-                 [10-                 [20-                   [10-                      [30-                   [0-
Combined                 70]%                 20]%                 30]%                   20]%                      40]%                   5]%
Total size of
  market
                    1 522            3 269           1 892                             3 743                     1 368                NA
   (EUR
  million)
 Source: Parties’ best estimates (tables 108-112 of Form CO)
 341. The data provided in table 23 shows that the market share of any particular insurer
      can vary quite considerably from year to year, due to the ‘lumpy’ nature of the
      market. Nonetheless, it is clear that NN and Delta Lloyd do both have the capacity
      to compete on the market for buy-outs should they choose to. Internal
      documentation provided by NN (dated June 2015) shows that NN is [NN's strategic
      assessment]. It refers to the buy-out market as “[quote of internal documents]” and
      explains that buy-outs [NN's strategic assessment]. The Notifying Party has also
      stated that NN is [NN's strategic assessment]. Delta Lloyd, […], appears to be now
      less active on the buy-out market than it has been in the past. Its internal documents
      (including a business plan for 2017-2019 and an update on capital planning for
      2015-2020 from Q3 2015) show that it [Delta Lloyd's strategic decision].
 342. The Notifying Party claims that data on the value of buy-outs won or competed for
      is irrelevant, because every buy-out is different and the interest of the buy-out will
      depend on each individual insurer’s own position, e.g. an insurance company that
      has a high-risk portfolio will be more interested in buying out a low risk pension
      fund, and vice-versa.
 343. The market investigation revealed mixed views as to the future of the buy-out
      market and the possible effects of the proposed transaction on competition on this
      market. Some respondents considered the buy-out market to be largely inactive, and
      saw no prospect of this changing in the foreseeable future. One competitor, for
      example, was of the opinion that by the time the buy-out market becomes active
      again, the OPFs that might have been candidates for buy-outs will have already
      merged or joined APFs.
                                                                    69

344. Most of the pension funds (OPFs and BPFs) which responded to the market
     investigation appeared to have very little knowledge of and/or interest in buy-outs.
     Of the few respondents who had any view on potential candidate purchasers for
     their own fund, none mentioned NN or Delta Lloyd, and none appeared to be aware
     of NN and Delta Lloyd being active in this market. 198 It should, however, be
     mentioned that the other main insurers were also very rarely mentioned, and the
     answers may therefore reflect a more general lack of knowledge, rather than
     implying that NN and Delta Lloyd are not strong on this market. None of the
     pension funds which responded to the market investigation thought that the
     proposed transaction could have an impact on the market for buy-outs.199
345. An OPF which the Commission spoke to during the prenotification phase was,
      however, concerned about the effect of the transaction on the market for buy-outs.
      The fund may at some point in the near future need to consider a buy-out and was
      therefore worried that the proposed transaction could reduce its choice of insurer
      and lead to it having to pay a higher single premium to be bought out. It would
      appear that this view is based on Delta Lloyd and NN’s past activity on the buy-out
      market, both having been active in recent years. [Confidential strategic decision of
      Delta Lloyd refuting these concerns]
346. Of the competitors who responded to the market investigation, around two thirds
     had competed in buy-outs in the last three years200, and at least some of the major
     insurers plan to compete in tenders in the next two years201. Several respondents did,
     however, also express doubt as to whether there will be many tenders to compete in,
     mentioning that OPFs are increasingly looking for other alternatives and that the
     low interest rate environment makes buy-outs unattractive.202 Most competitors
     agreed that buy-outs could be an attractive way for an insurer to gain scale, but
     added that this very much depends on both the economic environment, the risk
     characteristics of the pension fund and the insurer’s own financial position.203 Both
     competitors and actuarial companies were of the opinion that significant levels of
     capital and expertise were needed to compete successfully in the market for buy-
     outs, meaning that only the larger insurers are likely to be serious contenders in this
     area.204 Competitors generally perceived NN, ASR and Aegon to be the main
     competitors in the market for buy-outs.205 Actuarial companies mentioned the same
     companies, plus a number of others including Vivat.206 Delta Lloyd was only
     mentioned once (by a competitor), which is consistent with its very limited activity
     in 2015 and 2016. It is also well known in the industry that Delta Lloyd has the
     weakest solvency of the main insurers, and competitors are therefore likely to be
     able to conclude that it will not be in a position to compete on the market for buy-
     outs.
198  Q14 and Q14.0 of Questionnaire 5 to pension funds. One OPF spoken to during the prenotification
     calls did, however, seem to consider both Delta Lloyd and NN as potential purchasers, should the
     fund end up having to be bought out.
199  Q19 of Questionnaire 5 to pension funds.
200  Q41 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
201  Q46 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
202  Q43 and Q46 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
203  Q44 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
204  Q36 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products, Q47 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
205  Q48 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
206  Q37 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
                                                       70

347. Some competitors do, nonetheless, consider that the transaction could have an
      effect on the market for buy-outs.207 This is mainly based on the fact that both NN
      and Delta Lloyd have experience on this market, and that the only reason for Delta
      Lloyd not competing in tenders in the last couple of years has been [Delta Lloyd
      strategic assessment]. NN is known to have a strong capital position and, with its
      combined resources and expertise, the merged entity is therefore viewed by
      competitors as having the potential to be a strong player on the buy-out market.208
      None of the actuarial companies which responded to the market investigation
      considered that the transaction could have an impact on the market for buy-outs.209
348. Whilst it may be true that, despite […], the merged entity would benefit from the
      combined expertise of the two parties, there is no evidence to suggest that this
      would allow it to act in any way which would harm competition. Delta Lloyd’s
      [strategic decision] clearly indicates that [consequences of Delta Lloyds' strategic
      decision]. The nature of the market means that market shares are not necessarily the
      best measure of the different actors’ strength, but the Parties’ combined market
      shares in previous years are not, in any case, such as to suggest that it would be
      able to increase prices for buy-outs. The results of the market investigation confirm
      that at least three other strong competitors remain interested in the market for
      buyouts. Were the merged entity to artificially increase the single premiums it is
      prepared to accept for a buy-out, there would therefore be enough other
      competitors willing to accept a lower price, meaning that it could not successfully
      pursue such a strategy.
349. In view of the above, the Commission concludes that the transaction does not give
     rise to serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market.
        V.1.G. Coordinated effects
350. According to the Commission's Guidelines on the assessment of horizontal
     mergers,210 a merger in a concentrated market may significantly impede effective
     competition, through the creation or the strengthening of a collective dominance
     position, because it increases the likelihood that firms are able to coordinate their
     behaviour in this way and raise prices. Coordination is considered to be more likely
     to emerge in markets where it is relatively simple to reach a common understanding
     on the terms of coordination (such as keeping prices above competitive level,
     limiting production or by dividing the market) and where the economic environment
     is less complex and more stable. According to the Guidelines on horizontal mergers
     three conditions are necessary for coordination to be sustainable: ability to monitor
     competitors’ behaviour, existence of a deterrent mechanism which could be
     activated if deviation is detected and current and future competitors not participating
207  Q49 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors. Do you think that the Transaction will have an impact on the
     market for buy-outs? (2 yes, 1 no, 3 don’t know).
208  Q49.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors. “Delta Lloyd was very active in this field but because of
     low solvency is no longer active. But they still have the expertise. NN has the required solvency.
     Together they can have a very strong presence in this market”.
209  Q38 of Questionnaire 3 to distributors of pension products.
210  Guidelines on the assessment of horizontal mergers under the Council Regulation on the control of
     concentrations between undertakings (OJ C 31, 05.02.2004, paragraph 39), “Guidelines on horizontal
     mergers”.
                                                       71

     in the coordination, as well as customers, should not be able to jeopardise the results
     expected from the coordination
351. The Commission considers that in the present case the above conditions are not met,
     and thus the Transaction will not result in the creation or strengthening of
     coordination leading to significant impediment of effective competition on any of
     the markets concerned by the Transaction. The Commission considers so for the
     following reasons.
352. First, in the present case the market investigation has not revealed any indication or
     evidence that coordinated effects currently take place on any of the markets
     discussed in the present decision.
353. Second, the market investigation revealed that the markets affected by the
     Transaction undergo important changes driven by economic conditions or initiatives
     of the regulators. In particular, pension products and individual life insurance
     products have been going through significant structural changes, which lead to the
     introduction of new categories of players on these markets, making coordination
     even less plausible. Furthermore, the current environment of low interest rates is
     causing an important decline of most of the markets where insurers are active, in
     particular the market for DB pension products211 and the market for buy-outs.
354. As regards the regulatory changes, as explained in section V.1.A the market for
     group pension products experienced significant opening of the market, which
     allowed new categories of pension providers to compete on the pension products
     market. More specifically PPIs and APFs can offer pension products, while they do
     not need to have insurance license. As regards the individual life insurance, as
     explained in section V.1.B, the scandal related to misselling of unit-linked
     policies212, the regulatory changes which followed and the introduction of new
     category of products banksparen213 have resulted in important changes in the market
     for traditional individual life insurance savings and investment products.214 Also in
     this area competitors do not need to have insurance licence to offer competing
     products (in relation to banksparen they must have a banking licence).
355. The Commission notes, that while before these changes insurers were effectively
     competing only amongst themselves, currently on the market for pension products
     they face PPIs which can be set up by asset managers or banks and on the market
     for individual life insurance products they compete with banks offering banskparen.
356. As regards the remaining markets which have not been directly affected by the
     recent changes, namely fixed annuities or non-life insurance products the
     Commission notes the following. As regards the fixed annuities (decumulation
     pension products offered only by insurers) the market investigation revealed that
     international competitors such as Allianz have entered the market. Furthermore, the
     data regarding market shares presented in table 11 above, confirms the absence of
     coordinated effects among competitors by illustrating important switching in the top
211  See section V.1.A.1, in particular comment on actuarial companies who expect the sales of DB
     products to disappear in the coming years.
212  See section III.2.A.2
213  See section V.1.B.2
214  See section V.1.B.2
                                                   72

     three providers of DC decumulation products and the presence of actors outside of
     the 'big 6' traditional Dutch insurers, namely de Goudsee.
357. Similarly, the market for non-life insurance (in which the Parties' combined market
     share never exceeds [20-30]% under any possible market definition (section V.1.C)
     cannot be considered to be particularly concentrated and counts an important
     number of different providers. This is also confirmed by the DNB’s recent study of
     the insurance market215 which highlights the strong competition in the market for
     non-life insurance.
358. Third, the Commission considers that the Transaction may make potential
     coordination less plausible and less sustainable, in view of the market shares data.
     Inevitably, the Transaction reduces the number of competitors in each of the
     affected markets analysed in sections V.1.A to V.1.F, but does not impact the
     market conditions in such a way that terms of coordination could be reached more
     easily post-Transaction. More specifically, in all the affected markets, except for DC
     decumulation products, the Transaction will create a rather asymmetric market
     structure with the merged entity being the market leader, and the remaining main
     players strong but having significantly smaller market shares. As regards the market
     for DC decumulation pension products, post-Transaction the main two players
     would be of similar size but the Commission considers that coordination in this
     areas is unlikely due to the larger pool of players offering these products.
359. Fourth, the Commission notes that as regards the market for group pension products
     specifically, which in theory could seem to be most prone to coordination, the role
     played by intermediaries such as actuarial consultancy reinforces effective
     competitive market conditions. The market investigation revealed that pension
     providers prepare bespoke offers for each tender and often actuarial consultants
     negotiate with pension providers better terms for employers. Clearly if contracts and
     are concluded and prices set following such a non-transparent closed procedure,
     coordination and detection of deviations would be very difficult. Finally the
     Commission notes that products offered by various pension providers are not
     particularly homogeneous products and will be further diversified following the
     introduction of APFs. As explained in section IV.7 each APF can offer several risk
     polling circles having different characteristics as regards the risk level and expected
     returns. The Commission considers that the introduction of APFs, will make
     potential coordination even less likely on the Dutch pension market.
360. In general, the results of the market investigation did not raise any concerns about
     potential coordinated effects. More specifically, the results confirmed that insurers
     do not tend to target particular customer group216 or to limit their product offering217
     and serve very different types of customers (both in terms of activity sector and
     company size), which indicates that no coordinated effects related to the potential
     restriction of insurance production or the potential division of the customer base
     exist.
215  DNB, Visie op de toekomst van de Nederlandse verzekeringssector, December 2016,
     http://www.dnb nl/binaries/DNBrapport%20Visie%20op%20de%20toekomst%20van%20de%20ver
     zekringssector,%2013%20december%202016_tcm46-350191.pdf?2016121317.
216  Replies to question 26 and 34 of questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
217  Replies to question 9 and 91 of questionnaire Q1 to competitors
                                                       73


     pension products. Whilst acknowledging this argument, the Commission notes that
     in any event even if Zicht’s market share is attributed to NN the analysis below
     remains valid.
367. A large number of competitors will remain active in the distribution of pension
     products218, life insurance and non-life insurance respectively, many of whom have
     a stronger position than NN and Delta Lloyd.
368. In light of the Parties’ limited combined market shares in the downstream market
     for the distribution of insurance products, the Commission considers that the merged
     entity is unlikely to be able or to have the incentive to reduce competitors’ access to
     its distribution network (input foreclosure). Furthermore, the Commission considers
     that the merged entity could not afford to pursue the strategy of customer
     foreclosure, which in this case would mean distributing its products only via Zicht
     and through direct sales. In view of the importance of the outward distribution
     channels in the Netherlands, the Parties’ marginal position on this channel and the
     fact that the pension products in the Netherlands can only be distributed by
     specialised external advisors, such strategy could not be effective.
369. The Commission therefore considers that the Transaction does not raise serious
     doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market as regards vertical links
     between the insurance production and insurance distribution.
Distribution of insurance products via banks
370. Both NN and Delta Lloyd have exclusive distribution agreements with major banks:
     NN with ING and Delta Lloyd with ABN Amro. ING and ABN Amro are two out
     of the three main banks in the Netherlands. NN’s current agreement with ING was
     concluded in 2012, for a period of 10 years. ING receives […] for distributing NN’s
     policies. Delta Lloyd is involved in a joint venture with ABN Amro, in which Delta
     Lloyd holds 51% of shares and ABN Amro 49%. This was launched in 2003 and is
     scheduled to run until [year].
371. Until the end of [year], ING distributed both life and non-life insurance policies for
     NN, but as NN ceased offering life insurance to new customers in January 2017219,
     the arrangement now only covers non-life insurance. The proportion of NN policies
     sold by ING varies considerably between the different types of non-life insurance,
     for example from [0-5]% for motor insurance to [10-20]% for legal assistance
     insurance.
372. The proportion of Delta Lloyd’s sales that are achieved by ABN Amro is typically
     higher, but also shows significant variation across the types of policy, ranging from
     [0-5]% in disability insurance to [80-90]% in financial loss insurance.
218  A number of large and well-established international players remain active on the market for pension
     products, some of which are part of global consulting groups (such as AON Captive Services
     (Nederland) B.V., Willis Towers Watson and Marsh B.V. (part of Mercer)).
219  This may only be temporary as NN is considering outsourcing the production of term-life. It plans to
     offer a term-life insurance product from [business partner] (a term-life specialist), to be distributed
     primarily via [distribution channel]. The product would initially be sold under the [business partner]
     brand but may later be sold as [NN's strategic plans]..
                                                        75

373. Overall, [0-20]% of NN’s non-life insurance policies are sold by ING and [20-30]%
     of Delta Lloyd’s non-life insurance policies are sold by ABN Amro.
374. In the replies to the market investigation, several competitors mention that the
     combined entity will become very strong as a result of its large distribution network
     via banks. Competitors suggest that distribution agreements with banks provide easy
     access to customers, in particular for term-life insurance (which are typically
     purchased simultaneously with mortgages), disability and annuities.220 Competitors
     recognise that distribution via banks is not very important compared to distribution
     via intermediaries, direct sales and internet platforms such as comparison websites,
     but some of them argue that it may become more important in the future. No market
     participants other than competitors raise concerns about the insurance distribution
     via banks. Most distributors of individual life and non-life insurance products
     confirm, however, that they consider a link with a bank to make it easier for an
     insurer to sell certain types of non-life insurance products.221
375. In past decisions, the Commission has never considered distribution via banks to be
     a separate market222 and it appears that also in the present case, there is no particular
     reason to depart from the previous practice on insurance distribution. The
     Commission notes that post-transaction, the market would still include a wide range
     of intermediaries (in particular brokers and professional intermediaries).
     Furthermore, more specifically product tying and bundling between mortgage
     products and insurance products is not permitted under the Dutch law223, meaning
     that the bank channel is not particularly privileged when compared to other outward
     channels, when selling products related to mortgages.
376. The Notifying Party explained that banks can only offer insurance products to
     customers of the bank, i.e. customers which have an account with the bank. As the
     majority of individuals are only customers of one bank, any particular individual
     can choose to either purchase insurance from their bank, or via another channel (e.g.
     online, from a broker or directly from the insurer), but not from another bank.
     Whilst it is conceivable that a customer may switch to another bank if the terms that
     bank is offering for a mortgage are more favourable, given the relative value of, for
     example, a term-life policy and a mortgage, it is highly unlikely that a customer
     would switch banks for their mortgage in order to have access via the bank to a
     cheaper term-life policy, in particular given that they could purchase this same term-
     life policy independently (i.e. via another sales channel), and thus choose their bank
     on the basis of where they can find the best offer for a mortgage or the most
     attractive package for a current account. This means that, as a distributor of
     insurance, each bank is directly competing with entities offering term-life policy
     through other channels, but not with other banks. In this sense, the fact that the
     merged entity will have exclusive distribution agreements with two banks is less
     meaningful than it might at first appear to be. The customers of each of the two
     banks will still have exactly the same choice of distributors of insurance to choose
220  Responses to questions 109.1 and 120.4 in questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
221  Responses to question 28 in questionnaire Q4 to life and non-life insurance distributors.
222  Distribution via banks was considered to be either part of a market comprising all third-party
     outward distribution channels (brokers, agents and banks), or part of a broader market including, in
     addition, insurers’ own direct (captive) sales force.
223  Article 7:121 of the Dutch Civil Code (Burgerlijk wetboek).
                                                         76

     from, and distribution through banks cannot be seen as forming a separate
     distribution market, set apart from the other channels.
377. Some respondents to the market investigation suggested that the merged entity
     could have a competitive advantage on the market for term-life insurance, due to the
     distribution agreements with banks they have.224
378. The link between term-life and bank distribution arises due to the fact that term-life
     insurance is mainly bought at the point of taking out a mortgage. Although banks
     (and other parties issuing mortgages) are not legally allowed in the Netherlands to
     offer customers any discount or more favourable rates for buying the two products
     together, they would almost always offer their term-life policy (or the term-life
     policy they distribute) to their mortgage customers. It is obligatory for the vast
     majority of customers taking out a mortgage to have a term-life policy which means
     that if a customer does not take the term-life product offered to them by their
     mortgage provider, they would need to shop around to find another, better product.
     In many cases, it may therefore be easier and more convenient to purchase from the
     mortgage provider.
379. Around [70-80]% of NN’s term-life policies are sold to cover mortgage debt, and
     the Notifying Party estimates that the percentage is similar (between [60-70]% and
     [70-80]%) for the market as a whole.
380. The results of the market investigation confirmed that, in the vast majority of cases,
     term-life is purchased together with a mortgage. Distributors estimated that between
     75% and 100% of customers purchasing term-life insurance do so at the point of
     taking out a mortgage.225 A number of other reasons for taking out term-life
     insurance were, however, also mentioned, including: i) general saving for the future;
     ii) providing income after the death of the policyholder, including for paying rent,
     and financing children’s study; iii) in the case of divorce to cover the maintenance
     payment if the ex-partner dies; iv) insuring business risks such as the death of a key
     figure in a business; and v) covering other financial needs for SMEs.226
381. Since NN and Delta Lloyd both provide mortgages themselves, and have the
     exclusive distribution agreements with ING Bank and ABN Amro Bank the merged
     entity could be considered to have a particularly strong position in terms of access to
     potential term-life customers. Table 25 shows the market shares of NN, Delta
     Lloyd, ING and ABN Amro in the market for mortgage services, although it has to
     be underlined that as regards providing mortgages these four companies are
     currently in competition and post-Transaction the merged entity will have combined
     market share of [5-10]% on that market. The Parties’ exclusive agreements with the
     two banks concern only the distribution of insurance products and do not prevent
     these banks from competing on the market for mortgages. The table only serves as
     an illustration to indicated that post-Transaction, entities having in total almost [30-
224  Responses to questions 120.3 and 120.3 in questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
225  Q14 of Questionnaire 4. According to competitors 60 to 90% of customers purchasing term life
     insurance do so in the context of taking out a mortgage (Q92 of Questionnaire 1)
226  Q93 of Questionnaire 1 and Q15 of Questionnaire 4
                                                        77


     not allowed to receive commission payments from the insurance companies’ whose
     products they sell, and it is therefore not legally possible for insurance companies to
     in any way motivate intermediaries to favour a particular combination of their
     products. Furthermore, intermediaries are required by law to inform customers,
     before proceeding to give advice, which insurers they work with. Were an
     intermediary to reduce the number of different insurers’ products it offers,
     customers would be likely to go elsewhere.
386. The Commission considers that the Parties’ modest current combined market share
     in term-life insurance ([10-20]% combined, while having exclusive distribution
     agreement with two out of three major banks in the Netherlands) shows that
     customers can and do shop around to find better prices.
387. The fact that NN distributes [40-50]% of its term-life policies via ING, which is
     significantly higher than the proportion of individual life insurance overall that is
     distributed via ING (around [10-20]%), could indicate that as regards the term-life
     insurance the access to the banking channel gives NN a tangible competitive
     advantage.
388. Notwithstanding the above, the Commission notes that in any event NN’s modest
     market share in term-life insurance, which amounts to only [5-10]%, shows, first,
     that NN has not been able to use their own and respectively ING’s position in
     mortgages to gain significant influence in selling term-life insurance and second,
     that in fact banks channel is not of significant importance.
389. The Commission notes that the Parties’ combined market shares in term-life have
      remained very stable in recent years (between [10-20]% and [10-20]% over the
      years 2013-2015), which also demonstrates that the introduction of NN’s
      distribution agreement with ING in 2012 did not help to increase sales. Moreover,
      sales of new term-life policies (as illustrated by market shares in NWP) show that
      NN is not currently a major player in this area (with market shares in NWP of
      around [0-5]% over the period 2013-2015). Furthermore, as mentioned in the
      section V.1.B.1, NN has decided to cease offering its own term-life product and to
      offer a ‘white label’ policy, insured by another provider. Internal documentation229
      shows that this is [NN's strategic assessment]. Given in particular NN’s relatively
      weak position in term-life, it is therefore unlikely that, as a result of the
      Transaction, the merged entity could use its distribution links with banks which sell
      mortgages, or its own position in the mortgage market, to influence competition in
      the market for term-life insurance.
390. The respondents to the market investigation who expressed concern about the
     merged entity’s distribution agreements with banks were mainly competitors. One
     competitor explained, for example, that having a strong network of tied distributors
     (such as banks with which the insurer has an exclusive agreement and mandated
     brokers) is “always important for products such as term-life insurance which is
     mainly sold tied to mortgages or other products”, but also acknowledged that it is
     easy for customers to purchase such products online, or to get advice from an
     independent broker.230 This competitor regarded customers as being “locked-in”
229  External analysis performed for NN, January 2016; strategy presentation and meeting minutes,
     September 2016.
230  Q109.1 of Questionnaire 1 to competitors.
                                                  79

     when they purchase via a tied agent, such as a bank distributor. The Commission
     notes, however, that in view of the figures presented and analysed above, the vast
     majority of the Parties’ mortgages and those of their partner banks are not sold in
     this way. The above concern therefore does not reflect the market reality.
391. To conclude, the Commission considers that, contrary to some competitors’ claims,
     the distribution of insurance products via banks cannot be leveraged, even for
     products that are typically purchased together with banking products, such as term-
     life insurance, which is often purchased at the point of taking out a mortgage.
     Overall, only 6% of all insurance, and around 16% of individual non-life insurance
     are distributed via banks in the Netherlands. As regards individual life insurance
     products 75% of them are distributed via intermediaries, the remaining 25% of
     products are distributed directly by insurers or by banks 231 . Furthermore the
     Commission notes that Dutch law prevents providers from tying or bundling
     insurance products with mortgages and from offering better prices on any of these
     products if bought together.232 This fact was also confirmed by the respondents to
     the market investigation, who clearly indicated that there is no possibility of
     offering better prices for combinations of insurance products with banking
     products.233 Finally, in view of the increasing importance of online sales in the
     Netherlands, the Commission considers it unlikely that the bank channel could
     become stronger in the near future. The Commission considers that customers will
     therefore continue to have choice between several insurance products and several
     distribution channels.
392. In view of the above the Commission considers that the Transaction does not raise
     serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market as regards the link
     between the upstream market for insurance production and the downstream market
     for insurance distribution.
        V.2.B. Vertical overlap between insurance production and asset management
393. NN and Delta Lloyd are both active on the market for asset management, thus
     creating a vertical link between this upstream market and their downstream
     activities in the production of insurance. Insurance companies source asset
     management services in order to manage their investments. The Notifying Party
     explains that most insurers have set up their own asset management subsidiaries.
394. NN is present in asset management through its asset management brand NN
     Investment Partners, which is active in several European countries and outside
     Europe. Delta Lloyd is active through its subsidiary Delta Lloyd Asset
     Management, which operates in the Netherlands only. Both NN and Delta Lloyd
     offer asset management services to corporate and institutional investors, to mutual
     funds serving retail customers, and to pension funds, institutions and international
     organisations. The Notifying Party therefore submits that the asset management
     market is an international market.
231  The Notifying Party was not able to provide an exact figure for distribution via banks.
232  Burgerlijk Wetboek Boek 7 Artikel 121.
233  Pre-notification calls with competitors and a distributor of insurance products.
                                                         80

395. The market for asset management is very fragmented with several large
     international competitors such as BNP Paribas IP, BlackRock, AXA Investment
     Managers and Allianz Global Investors also active in the Netherlands.
396. The Parties’ combined market share comes to [10-20]% (with an increment of [0-
     5]% brought by Delta Lloyd) in the overall market for asset management if the
     market is considered to be national, and to [0-5]% if the market is considered to be
     EEA-wide.
397. The Commission considers it extremely unlikely that this position would allow the
     merged entity to exert any significant market power given the presence of other
     strong players on the market. Were the merged entities’ subsidiaries for asset
     management to limit access to competing insurers by raising costs, no input
     foreclosure could possibly arise as sufficient competitors remain active on the
     upstream market for asset management. Similarly, the merged entity is unlikely to
     have the incentive to purchase all of its asset management services from its own
     subsidiaries and no customer foreclosure could possibly arise.
398. For the above reasons, the Commission considers that the proposed transaction does
     not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market as regards the
     vertical links between the market for asset management and the downstream market
     for insurance production.
        V.2.C. Vertical overlap between insurance production and reinsurance
399. Both Parties are active on the upstream market for reinsurance and provide
     reinsurance to external clients for life and non-life risks.
400. On the global market for reinsurance, the Parties would have a de minimis combined
     market share of less than [0-5]%, and there appears to be no risk of customer or
     input foreclosure in this market.
401. The Notifying Party contends that NN and Delta Lloyd’s reinsurance needs are very
     small in the context of the market. As a result, the Parties’ reinsurance companies
     would have no incentive to provide their services exclusively to the merged entity as
     there would not be sufficient business. Likewise, the merged entity procuring all its
     reinsurance services from the Parties’ reinsurance companies would have no effect
     on other potential customers. There is thus no risk of either input or customer
     foreclosure.
402. For the above reasons, the Commission considers that the proposed transaction does
     not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market as regards the
     vertical links between the upstream market for reinsurance and the downstream
     market for insurance production.
        V.2.D. Vertical overlap         between    insurance    production   and    pensions
                  administration
403. NN is active on the market for pensions administration through its wholly owned
     subsidiary AZL N.V., which provides services to approximately 58 pension funds
     with 900 000 participants. Delta Lloyd is also active in this market, but has only a
     very minor presence. There is therefore a horizontal overlap between the Parties’
     activities in pensions administration (but not such as to create an affected market)
     and also a potential vertical overlap between the Parties’ activities on the upstream
                                                 81

     market for pensions administration and on the downstream market for the provision
     of pension arrangements.
404. AZL currently provides pension administration services to NN’s captive pension
     schemes (NN’s APF and PPI) and to OPFs and BPFs. It does not provide pension
     administration services to other insurance companies, and in particular does not
     provide services to Delta Lloyd. The Notifying Party estimates AZL’s market share
     on the Dutch market for pensions administration to be [0-5]%.
405. The Notifying Party maintains that there is no risk of either input or customer
     foreclosure: even if the merged entity were to procure all of its pension
     administration services from AZL, other providers of pensions administration would
     continue to have sufficient business to compete for. Likewise, if AZL were to
     provide its services exclusively to the merged entities, other potential customers
     (e.g. BPFs and OPFs) would continue to have sufficient choice of providers.
406. In view of the above, and particularly the number of strong competitors that would
     remain on the market, it is highly unlikely that NN’s position on the upstream
     market for pensions administration would significantly impede effective
     competition in relation to the vertical link between the upstream market for pension
     administration and the downstream market for insurance production.
        V.2.E. Conglomerate effects
407. The merged entity’s combined strength in related markets could potentially lead to
     conglomerate effects in a number of areas, in particular due to the fact that certain
     products are typically sold concurrently. Dutch legislation typically prohibits
     ‘bundling’ in relation to insurance products for individuals (e.g. as described in the
     section on term-life insurance), but pension products sold to employers may be sold
     as part of a package including, for example, group disability insurance. The
     following combinations of products are the most common in the Netherlands, and
     thus most relevant in relation to conglomerate effects:
              i.  Cross-selling various types of group non-life insurance, in particular
                  group disability insurance with pension scheme contracts;
             ii.  Selling term-life and/or home and contents or fire insurance with
                  mortgages; and
            iii.  Selling various types of non-life insurance together, in particular fire
                  and liability insurance.
408. In general, the Notifying Party maintains that it would not be in a position to adopt
     any sort of bundling or tying strategy, through which it could increase prices, as
     customers could easily switch to alternative suppliers. The Notifying Party further
     notes that customers’ ability to switch is strengthened by the role of intermediaries
     and price comparison websites.
409. With respect to point (i) above, the Notifying Party asserts that neither NN nor Delta
     Lloyd actively engage in cross-selling of group non-life insurance products with
     pension products. The Parties estimate that at most [10-20]% of NN pension
     customers also have NN group non-life insurance products, and approximately [0-
     5]% of Delta Lloyd pension customers also have Delta Lloyd group non-life
     insurance. Furthermore, the results of the market investigation strongly suggests that
     additional insurance offered as part of the pension package is only a very minor
     consideration when choosing a pension provider.
                                                 82

410. Point (ii) above has already been discussed with regard to term-life insurance, and
     very similar arguments hold in relation to any potential bundling of home and
     contents or fire insurance with mortgages. Although NN, Delta Lloyd and their
     partner banks, ING and ABN Amro hold, together, a large part of the mortgage
     market, the fact that a high proportion of mortgages are sold via intermediaries
     significantly lessens the Parties’ ability to cross-sell other products, as illustrated by
     the Parties’ relatively modest combined market share in term-life and the various
     non-life policies. It is clear that, prior to the Transaction, the Parties were unable to
     use their exclusive distribution agreements with banks to strengthen their position in
     the relevant non-life insurance markets.234 Moreover, there is no evidence to suggest
     that their combined position in non-life insurance following the Transaction will
     allow them to benefit from these exclusive agreements to any greater extent, and as
     such, there are no grounds to suppose that the combination of the merged entity’s
     exclusive agreements with two banks, and its position in non-life insurance would
     allow it to artificially inflate prices for non-life insurance. Lastly, non-life insurance
     policies are possibly even easier than individual life insurance policies to purchase
     online or via another channel, without any need for particular advice. It is therefore
     almost impossible to envisage that customers of ING and ABN Amro would be
     ‘locked in’ to buying non-life insurance policies from the merged entity.
411. In relation to point (iii) above, it does appear that customers in the Netherlands very
     often purchase several types of non-life insurance together. Nonetheless, given that
     the Parties’ combined market share is relatively modest in all types of non-life
     insurance (around [20-30]% in the affected markets, and lower in others), it seems
     unlikely that the merged entity would be able to raise prices in this area through a
     bundling strategy, especially given the wide range of competitors also present (both
     the other large insurers and smaller niche players).
VI. CONCLUSION
412. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
     operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
     functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
     Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                            For the Commission
                                                            (Signed)
                                                            Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                            Member of the Commission
234  The Parties’ combined market share in fire insurance has remained stable at around [20-30]% over
     the period 2013-2015. Their combined share of new business (NWP) has fallen from just below [30-
     40]% in 2012 to just above [20-30]% in 2014.
                                                     83
 <<--NEW VERSION-->>            EUROPEAN
           COMMISSION
                                     Brussels, 7.4.2017
                                     C(2017) 2403 final
                                     PUBLIC VERSION
                COMMISSION DECISION
                         of 7.4.2017
   relating to Article 9 of Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
referring to case M.8257 - NN GROUP / DELTA LLOYD
             (Only the English text is authentic)

                                     COMMISSION DECISION
                                              of 7.4.2017
                      relating to Article 9 of Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
                 referring to case M.8257 - NN GROUP / DELTA LLOYD
                                   (Only the English text is authentic)
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION,
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (the "TFEU")1,
Having regard to Council Regulation (EC) No. 139/2004 of 20.1.2004 on the control of
concentrations between undertakings2 (the "Merger Regulation"), and in particular Article
9(3) thereof,
Having regard to the notification made by NN Group N.V. ("NN", the "Notifying Party") on
22 February 2017, pursuant to Article 4 of the said Regulation,
Having regard to the Referral Request of the Netherlands, via the Netherlands Autoriteit
Consument & Markt (Authority for Consumers and Markets, "ACM") of 7 March 2017,
Having informed the Notifying Party of the Referral Request on 9 March 2017,
Having given the Notifying Party the opportunity to make known its views on the request of
the Netherlands of 7 March 2017 and having regard to the Notifying Party's observations of
13 March 2017,
Whereas:
(1)      On 22 February 2017 the Commission received notification of a proposed
         concentration by which NN of the Netherlands acquires within the meaning of
         Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation control of the whole of Delta Lloyd N.V.,
         also of the Netherlands by way of a public bid announced on 2 February 2017 ("the
         Proposed Transaction").
(2)      The Netherlands received a copy of the notification, via the ACM, on 27 February
         2017.
(3)      By letter dated 7 March 2017 and received on 8 March 2017, the Dutch authorities
         via the ACM submitted that the Proposed Transaction threatens to significantly affect
         competition in several insurance markets in the Netherlands, which present all the
         characteristics of distinct markets in accordance with Article 9(2)(a) of the Merger
         Regulation. The Dutch authorities requested to refer partially the Proposed
         Transaction to its competition authority with a view to assessing it under national
1
         OJ C115, 9.8.2008, P.47.
2
         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p.1. With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on the Functioning of the
         European Union ("TFEU") has introduced certain changes, such as the replacement of "Community"
         by "Union" and "common market" by "internal market". The terminology of the TFEU will be used
         throughout this decision.
                                                    3

     competition law (the "Referral Request"). The Dutch authorities submitted further
     comments concerning the Referral Request by letter of 3 April 2017.
(4)  By letter of 9 March 2017 the Commission forwarded the Referral Request to the
     Notifying Party.
(5)  The Notifying Party provided the Commission with its observations on the Referral
     Request by letter of 13 March 2017.
1.   THE PARTIES
(6)  NN is a Netherlands-based financial services provider active in the provision of life
     and non-life insurance policies, pension products, banking and asset management to
     both individuals and corporations. It is active in 18 countries worldwide, including a
     number of European markets.
(7)  Delta Lloyd is a Netherlands-based financial services provider active in the provision
     and distribution of life and non-life insurance policies, pension products, banking
     services and asset management to both individuals and corporations. It is active in
     the Netherlands and Belgium.
2.   THE OPERATION AND THE CONCENTRATION
(8)  The Proposed Transaction consists of the acquisition by NN of the whole of Delta
     Lloyd by way of a public bid announced on 2 February 2017. This formal offer
     marked the start of a nine-week offer period (ending 7 April 2017) during which
     Delta Lloyd shareholders can choose to sell to NN on the terms set out in the bid.
(9)  It follows that the proposed concentration constitutes a concentration within the
     meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
3.   EU DIMENSION
(10) The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
     more than EUR 5 000 million (NN EUR [10 000 - 15 000] million, Delta Lloyd
     EUR [0 – 5 000] million). Each of them has EU-wide turnover in excess of
     EUR 250 million (NN EUR [5 000 – 10 000] million, Delta Lloyd EUR [0 – 5 000]
     million). Delta Lloyd achieves more than two thirds of its aggregate EU-wide
     turnover within one and the same Member State (the Netherlands) but NN does not.
     The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension.
4.   PROCEDURE
(11) The Referral Request relates to the activities of NN and Delta Lloyd in the
     Netherlands, while overlaps between the Parties' activities occur in both the
     Netherlands and Belgium.
(12) In order for a referral request to be issued based on Article 9(2)(a) of the Merger
     Regulation one procedural and two substantive conditions must be fulfilled.
(13) The procedural condition is that the referral request must be made within 15 working
     days of the date on which the notification of the concentration to the Commission is
     received by that Member State. In this regard, the Commission notes that the
     Netherlands, via the ACM, received a copy of the notification of the Proposed
     Transaction on 27 February 2017 and that the Referral Request was submitted to the
     Commission on 8 March 2017. The Request was therefore made within 15 working
                                            4

       days of receipt by the Netherlands of the notification of the Proposed Transaction
       and, consequently, within the deadline stipulated in Article 9(2) of the Merger
       Regulation.
(14)   The substantive conditions are, first, that in assessing a referral request, the
       Commission is required to determine whether there is a market within the requesting
       Member State which is affected by the notified concentration and which presents all
       the characteristics of a distinct market. Pursuant to Article 9(3) of the Merger
       Regulation and the case law of the General Court,3 the Commission is required to
       evaluate this on the basis of a definition of the market for the relevant product or
       services and a definition of the geographical reference market. Second, the
       Commission is required to verify whether the notified concentration threatens to
       significantly affect competition in this market.
(15)   Pursuant to Article 9(3) of the Merger Regulation, in the event that the criteria
       provided for in Article 9(2)(a) are fulfilled, the Commission has discretion whether it
       is appropriate to refer the case to the requesting Member State. In exercising such
       discretion the Commission will take into account the need to ensure effective
       protection of competition in all markets affected by the transaction.4 The
       Commission exercises that discretion taking into account the criteria set out in the
       case law and the Referral Notice.5
(16)   In the following, the Commission assesses the appropriateness of a referral in the
       present case in light of the principles set out in the Referral Notice.
5.     THE CRITERIA OF ARTICLE 9(2)(A) OF THE MERGER REGULATION
5.1.   Submission of the Dutch authorities
(17)   The Dutch authorities asked for a partial referral of the Proposed Transaction to the
       ACM. The Referral Request is limited to the effects of the Proposed Transaction on
       insurance markets in the Netherlands. The Dutch authorities submitted that, pursuant
       to Article 9(2)(a) of the Merger Regulation the Proposed Transaction would threaten
       to significantly affect competition on several insurance markets in the Netherlands
       which present all the characteristics of a distinct market.
5.1.1. Markets within the Netherlands which present all the characteristics of a distinct
       market
(18)   In the Referral Request, the Dutch authorities submit that the Proposed Transaction
       threatens to significantly affect competition in the hypothetical national market for
       life insurance or the hypothetical narrower national markets for pure protection
       products, savings and investment and/or pension products.
(19)   The Dutch authorities submit that while the Proposed Transaction leads to horizontal
       overlaps also on the markets for non-life insurance, asset management and
       reinsurance, they do not consider that the Proposed Transaction threatens to
       significantly affect competition on these markets. Therefore, these markets will not
       be further analysed for the purpose of this Decision.
3
       Joined Cases T-346/02 and T-347/02 Cableuropa SA and Others v Commission [2003]
       EU:T:2003:256, paragraph 105.
4
       Referral Notice, paragraph 8.
5
       Referral Notice, paragraphs 5, 7-9.
                                               5

(20)   In line with their past decisional practice, the Dutch authorities consider that there is
       a separate market for life insurance and that a possible segmentation into
       hypothetical narrower markets may result from further investigation. The Dutch
       authorities submit that in the Netherlands pure protection products and savings and
       investment products are individual life insurance products and pension products are
       group life insurance products.
(21)   Furthermore, the Dutch authorities submit that subject to the results of the market
       investigation fiscally attractive savings products offered by banks (so called
       "banksparen") could be substitutes of traditional life insurance products and form
       part of the same product market.
(22)   As regards pension products the Dutch authorities submit that neither industry nor
       occupational pension funds that are mandatory for employers are likely to be part of
       the same product market as pension products. Nonetheless, although the Dutch
       authorities believe it to be unlikely, company pension funds could be included in this
       market for pension products. In the view of the Dutch authorities, a further
       investigation should determine to what extent new pension providers on the Dutch
       pension market (such as Premium Pension Institutions (PPI) and general pension
       funds) effectively compete with life insurance companies.
(23)   In line with its past practice as well as the Commission's past decisions the Dutch
       authorities submit that the market for all categories of the above mentioned insurance
       products is national in scope, in particular due to international differences in
       distribution channels, consumer preferences and regulatory framework.
5.1.2. Markets within the Netherlands in which the Transaction threatens to significantly
       affect competition
(24)   In accordance with paragraph 35 of the Referral Notice, to meet the criteria for
       referral under Article 9(2)(a) of the Merger Regulation, the Netherlands should
       demonstrate that, based on a preliminary analysis, there is a real risk that the
       Proposed Transaction threatens to significantly affect competition. Such preliminary
       indications may be in the nature of prima facie evidence of such a possible
       significant adverse impact, but would be without prejudice to the outcome of a full
       investigation.
(25)   The Dutch authorities consider that the Proposed Transaction threatens to
       significantly affect competition on the markets for life insurance and its potential
       segments: pure protection products, savings and investment products (potentially
       including banksparen) and pension products, because of the effects on the relevant
       markets set out below.
(26)   The Dutch authorities note that the merged entity would become the national market
       leader, in addition to which its position would be strengthened by the fact that the
       barriers to entry to the life insurance market are high, in particular as a result of the
       need for scale.
(27)   The Dutch authorities note that, following the Proposed Transaction, the merged
       entity would hold [30-40]% of the overall market for life insurance and would thus
       become market leader in the Netherlands. It would compete with the four remaining
                                               6

     main insurance companies,6 and with smaller players jointly accounting for [10-20]%
     of the market.
(28) According to the Dutch authorities, the Proposed Transaction is most likely to have
     an effect on competition within the narrower market for pension products, in which
     the combined entity would become market leader with a [30-40]% market share in
     the overall market for pension products, and [40-50]% in the narrower segment
     limited to defined contribution pension products.7 Four main competitors would
     remain active on the market for pension products, and [90-100]% of the market
     would be held by the top five players.8
(29) Furthermore, the Dutch authorities consider that the Proposed Transaction could lead
     to significant coordinated effects as a result of the relatively high level of
     concentration in the market. With respect to product characteristics, existing national
     regulation and barriers to entry, the Dutch authorities stress that further investigation
     would allow them to measure the competitive pressure exerted by other players, in
     particular PPIs and general pension funds, on insurance companies and vice versa.
(30) With regard to the market for individual life-insurance, the Dutch authorities note
     that the merged entity would become market leader with [30-40]% market share in
     savings and investment products in the Netherlands. The remaining actors in this
     segment would be Aegon ([5-10]%), Achmea, Vivat and ASR (combined [10-20]%)
     and smaller players ([20-30]%).
(31) Due to lack of data, the Dutch authorities state that one cannot exclude the possibility
     of significant impediments to competition in the hypothetical national product
     market for banksparen products, and in potential narrower segments within this
     market limited to either products for saving severance payments or to retirement
     savings products (in both of which the merged entity would have a market share of
     around [20-30]%). Nonetheless, the Dutch authorities do not prima facie expect the
     transaction to significantly affect competition on these markets.
5.2. Notifying Party's Views
(32) The Notifying Party considers that the Proposed Transaction does not threaten to
     significantly affect competition and is of the view that the Referral Request does not
     demonstrate how the concentration prima facie threatens to significantly affect
     competition.
(33) The Notifying Party reiterates the arguments submitted in the Form CO, which, in its
     view, demonstrate that the Proposed Transaction does not raise competition
     concerns. In particular, with regard to pension products in the Netherlands, the
     Notifying Party submits the following arguments to explain why, in its opinion, the
     Transaction would not lead to unilateral effects:
     (a)     industry and occupational pension funds should be considered part of the
             insurance pension products market, or at the very least it should be recognised
             that they do exert competitive pressure on the Parties;
6
     Aegon ([10-20]%), Achmea ([10-20]%), Vivat ([10-20]%) and ASR ([10-20]%).
7
     In the Form CO, NN provides market share data for pension products under several hypothetical
     markets, distinguishing between defined benefit (DB) and defined contribution (DC) products,
     accumulation and decumulation phases, regular and single premium products, unit-linked and non-
     unit-linked products.
8
     Aegon ([20-30]%), ASR ([10-20]%), Vivat ([10-20]%) and Achmea ([10-20]%).
                                               7

     (b)      at least five main players would remain active on the narrowest segments of the
              life insurance market considered;
     (c)      there is a significant amount of competition in the overall pension market, and
              ongoing developments, such as the introduction of new pension vehicles, are
              designed to increase choice for the end customer;
     (d)      the increased importance of defined contribution policies relative to defined
              benefit policies, and in particular the introduction of Premium Pension
              Institutions (PPI) and general pension funds, has made entry to the market
              easier, as capital requirements are lower;
     (e)      contracts for pension products expire every 3 to 5 years, meaning that
              switching takes place regularly. Competition is also increased by the presence
              of intermediaries, which are required by regulation to obtain offers for their
              clients from at least three suppliers; and
     (f)      individual life insurance is largely a closed book business. In addition, from
              2017 onwards, NN will stop selling new individual life insurance products
              independently.9
(34) Furthermore, the Notifying Party submits the following arguments explaining why,
     in its opinion, the Proposed Transaction would not lead to any coordinated effects:
     (a)      a significant number of strong players (at least five) would remain active on the
              market;
     (b)      life insurance products are not homogeneous, as is evidenced by the fact that
              the Commission has previously considered narrower hypothetical market
              segments based on different characteristics of the products concerned;
     (c)      the entry and role of new entities in the pensions market, including PPIs, asset
              managers and general pension funds10 , helps to ensure a dynamic market; and
     (d)      the role of intermediaries significantly reduces the risk of coordinated effects,
              as it limits insurers' ability to coordinate, to monitor the behaviour of
              competitors, and, ultimately to discipline competitors via any type of
              deterrence mechanism.
5.3. Commission's assessment
(35) The Proposed Transaction creates overlaps between the activities of the Parties in a
     number of markets in the Netherlands and in Belgium. As the Referral Request
     relates only to the markets for asset management, banking services, non-life
     insurance, life insurance and (including its potential narrower segments of pension
     products, pure protection products and savings and investment products) in the
     Netherlands, analysis will be limited to these markets for the purpose of this
     Decision.
(36) Furthermore, the Dutch competition authorities submit that prima facie they do not
     expect the Proposed Transaction to threaten to significantly affect competition on the
     markets for asset management and non-life insurance. The Commission's market
9
     It is planning to outsource production of such products.
10
     General pension Funds (APFs) began operating in 2016. They are a type of pension vehicle operating
     several schemes in ring-fenced circles.
                                                   8

         investigation supports the same conclusion, and thus these markets will not be
         analysed further for the purpose of this Decision.
(37)     The Dutch authorities are of the view that the Proposed Transaction threatens to
         significantly affect competition on the market for life insurance and in particular
         pension products in the Netherlands, and that it cannot be excluded that the Proposed
         Transaction could threaten to significantly affect competition on the market for
         banksparen. These markets will be therefore analysed further in this Decision.
5.3.1.   Product market definition
(38)     In previous decisions relating to the insurance sector, the Commission identified
         three broad categories of insurance products: life insurance, non-life insurance and
         reinsurance.11 The Commission has further considered segmenting the life insurance
         market according to the purpose served by the product, distinguishing between: (i)
         pure risk protection products, (ii) savings and investment products, and (iii) pension
         products.12 In addition, the Commission has considered a possible segmentation of
         these product markets between group and individual products.13
(39)     The results of the market investigation broadly confirm the product market
         definitions established in previous Commission decisions as regards the markets for
         life insurance, and its sub-segments of: (i) pure protection, (ii) savings and
         investment, and (iii) pension products.
5.3.1.1. Pension products
(40)     As regards pension products, in previous cases, the Commission considered the
         possibility of separate markets for accumulation and decumulation products.14 This
         distinction is only relevant for defined contribution (DC)15 pension schemes and not
         for defined benefit (DB)16 pension schemes.17 It would therefore also seem
         appropriate to consider separate markets for DB and DC pension products.
         Furthermore as regards DC pension schemes, one can distinguish unit-linked DC
         products, which do not entail any guarantees regarding future pension level, and non-
         unit linked DC schemes, offering certain guarantees. Further segmentation of the
         pension products can be contemplated i.e. between accumulation and decumulation
         and, further, between fixed and variable annuities.
(41)     The results of the market investigation confirm that the distinction between DB and
         DC insurance products is appropriate, as has been envisaged in past Commission
         cases.
11
         See COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas/Fortis, COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur.
12
         See COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance business, COMP/M.6521 Talanx International Meiji
         Yasuda Life insurance/Warta.
13
         See COMP/M.5075 Vienna Insurance Group/EBV, COMP/M.4701 Generali/PPF Insurance Business.
14
         See COMP/M.7478 Aviva/Friends Life/Tenet.
15
         Defined contribution: pension schemes in which the ultimate level of pension is unknown and depends
         on market conditions and the investment performance of the pension provider.
16
         Defined benefit: traditional schemes which guarantee the level of pension, e.g. as percentage of final
         salary.
17
        The accumulation phase relates to the employer's contract with an insurer for the provision of pensions
         for its employees. The decumulation phase involves the purchase, by each individual scheme member,
         of an annuity at the point of retirement. This distinction does not apply to DB pensions as the pension
         benefits are paid out within the scheme, rather than in the form of an annuity.
                                                        9

(42)     In any event, in the present case and for the purpose of this Decision the question of
         whether there is one market for pension products or whether it should be further
         segmented as set out above can be left open, as the assessment of the impact of the
         Proposed Transaction leads to the same conclusions irrespective of the exact
         definition of the pension products market.
5.3.1.2. Individual life insurance and banksparen
(43)     On the market for individual life insurance products, the Proposed Transaction leads
         to affected market only in the area of savings and investment products and
         banksparen.
(44)     In the Netherlands the traditional savings and investment insurance products have, to
         a large extent, been replaced by banksparen, which are offered by banks (including
         by insurers' banking subsidiaries). It seems likely that the traditional savings and
         investment life insurance products and banksparen products are part of the same
         market.18 Furthermore, both traditional life insurance savings and investment
         products and banksparen products can be considered to consist of an accumulation
         product and a decumulation product.
(45)     In any event, for the purpose of this Decision the product market definition relating
         to individual life insurance products and banksparen products can be left open, as the
         assessment of the impact of the Proposed Transaction remains the same irrespective
         of which of the above market definitions is contemplated. .
5.3.2.   Geographic market definition
(46)     The Commission previously considered the geographic market for life insurance and
         its respective segments to be national in scope.19 Both the Dutch authorities and the
         Notifying Party agree with this geographic market definition and also the market
         investigation did not reveal any arguments which would cast doubt on this finding.
5.3.3.   Competitive assessment
5.3.3.1. Pension products
(47)     Tables 1-4 show the Parties' market shares on each of the possible product markets
         within the Dutch market for insurers' pension products which would be affected by
         the Proposed Transaction (as presented in the Form CO).
18
         The Notifying Party's claims that individual life insurance products are largely a closed book and that
         2017 onwards NN will stop selling new individual life insurance products independently, are based on
         the assumption that banksparen do not form part of the individual life insurance market. If banksparen
         are considered substitutes of traditional life insurance market, as has been confirmed by the results of
         the market investigation, the market is not a closed book. In addition, products such as term-life
         insurance continue to be sold in the same way as in the past.
19
         See COMP/M.5384 BNP Paribas/Fortis, COMP/M.4284 AXA/Winterthur.
                                                        10


DC schemes
(51)     Considering all the various possible market definitions of the pension market, the
         highest combined market share for the merged entity is found on the market for DC
         accumulation unit-linked schemes (i.e. schemes without any guarantees regarding the
         level of benefit) offered by insurers, where it would hold [40-50]% of the market
         (based on 2015 data), with the next closest competitor (Vivat) having around [25-
         35]% market share. Nonetheless, as submitted by the Notifying Party, and confirmed
         by the market investigation, there are also other providers active on this market in
         addition to insurers. Asset managers and banks that have been able to enter the
         pensions market thanks to the introduction of new pension vehicles (which do not
         require an insurance licence) could be seen as specialising in unit-linked DC
         schemes, as this is the only type of product they offer. They are not subject to strict
         regulatory requirements, in the way that insurers are, which means that their products
         tend to be cheaper. If they are included in the total market for unit-linked DC
         products, the Parties combined market share would be [40-50]%. The results of the
         market investigation clearly demonstrate that these newly introduced pension
         vehicles (including those set up by non-insurers) do exert significant competitive
         pressure on insurers, and that there is thus plenty of choice for customers.
Overall pension products
(52)     In general, the Parties do not seem to be especially close competitors on the pension
         product market or any of its sub-segments. All the major insurance companies offer
         similar products, and information on switching patterns seen amongst customers of
         DC schemes at the point of renewal (typically every 2-3 years) confirms that the
         Parties are not each other's closest competitors.20 The respondents to the market
         investigation, in particular customers and distributors do not consider the Parties to
         be particularly close competitors.
(53)     Most customers and distributors who responded to the market investigation do not
         expect the Proposed Transaction to have negative effects on the pension products
         market and 80% of customers consider there to be sufficient choice left on the Dutch
         pension market. The need for consolidation in the sector is also recognised by
         stakeholders. Some competitors mention that the merged entity would become
         market leader with a significant scale, making it more difficult for remaining
         competitors to compete. None of their arguments suggest, however, that the
         Proposed Transaction could lead to competition concerns.
(54)     The information provided in the Form CO was based on 2015 data. The
         Commission's market reconstruction of the Dutch pension market for 2016 indicates
         that the Parties' position has not grown in terms of market shares and competitive
         strength.
(55)     In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Proposed Transaction does
         not threaten to significantly affect competition on the market for pension products in
         the Netherlands or on any of its segments.
20
         For example, of those customers switching away from NN for the decumulation phase, [10-20]%
         purchased an annuity from Delta Lloyd in 2016, which is in line with Delta Lloyd's market share in
         DC decumulation products.
                                                   12

5.3.3.2. Individual life insurance and banksparen
(56)     The Parties' combined market shares on the market for individual savings and
         investment insurance products are fairly modest, while the introduction of
         banksparen has significantly increased the number of actual and potential suppliers
         able to compete on the market. On an overall market including both traditional life
         insurance savings and investment products and banksparen, the Parties would have a
         combined market share of [20-30]%, with an increment of [5-10]% brought by Delta
         Lloyd. On a product market for banksparen alone, or any of the possible product
         markets within banksparen, the Parties' combined market share is lower.
(57)     In view of the above, and the fact that the results of the market investigation did not
         reveal any concerns with regard to the individual life insurance market (including or
         excluding banksparen), the Commission considers that the Proposed Transaction
         does not threaten to significantly affect competition on these markets in the
         Netherlands.
5.3.4.   Conclusion
(58)     The Commission considers that the Proposed Transaction does not threaten to
         significantly affect competition on any of the markets identified by the Dutch
         authorities in their Referral Request, which means that the Referral Request does not
         meet the criteria of Article 9(2)(a) of the Merger regulation.
6.       The Commission's discretion in deciding whether to refer the case
(59)     Pursuant to Article 9(3) of the Merger Regulation, the Commission may refer part of
         the case to a Member State with a view to the application of the national competition
         law if the conditions laid down in Article 9(2)(a) of the Merger Regulation are met,
         that is to say, if the proposed concentration threatens to significantly affect
         competition in a market within the requesting Member State which presents all the
         characteristics of a distinct market. In such case, according to the Referral Notice, the
         Commission may refer the case taking into account in particular i) which is the
         authority more appropriate to carry out the investigation, ii) the benefits inherent in
         the 'one-stop-shop' system and iii) the importance of legal certainty with regard to
         jurisdiction.21
6.1.     Submission of the Dutch authorities
(60)     The Dutch authorities contend that the Dutch competition authority (ACM) is the
         more appropriate authority to deal with this case, firstly because the markets in
         question are all national.22 They further argue that the ACM has gained experience in
         the insurance market, both through its assessment of proposed concentrations and as
         a result of anti-trust investigations and advisory services provided to the Dutch trade
         association for the industry. The ACM also has an in-house research team that has
         published reports on various financial industries.
(61)     Whilst acknowledging that the partial referral requested would run counter to the
         one-stop-shop principle, the Dutch authorities maintain that it would not lead to
         significant extra administrative work for the Parties. The Dutch authorities highlight
21
         Paragraph 8 of the Referral Notice.
22
         With the exception of asset management, which is in any case not considered to raise competition
         concerns by the Dutch authority.
                                                 13

     that the ACM is already familiar with the content of the case and would be ready to
     launch a market investigation, and also maintains that, due to the national scope of
     the investigation, both the Parties and the respondents to the investigation could
     benefit from efficiencies were the investigation to be conducted by the ACM rather
     than the Commission.
(62) Similarly, the Dutch authorities also acknowledge that a partial referral would result
     in a deviation from the original power with regard to the Proposed Transaction, they
     consider this does not lead to a breach of the principle of legal certainty. This is
     because the grounds for the referral are sufficiently compelling to depart from the
     original jurisdiction.
6.2. Notifying Party's view
(63) In general, the Notifying Party considers that the Commission is best placed to
     continue the assessment of the proposed transaction.
(64) First, the Notifying Party emphasises that the referral would result in a significant
     increase in the administrative burden for the Notifying Party and other interested
     parties. The Notifying Party would need to submit a new notification form in another
     language, and is likely to have to answer a number of questions from the ACM, in
     order for the ACM to reach the same level of understanding of the case as the
     Commission's case team has already acquired. Furthermore, while the Commission
     has completed its market investigation, the ACM would still need to launch its own
     investigation, which would imply an additional administrative burden for the
     Notifying Party and for third parties.
(65) Second, the Notifying Party submits that some market participants active on the
     markets relevant to the Proposed Transaction can operate on a cross-border basis and
     that actors of this type are increasingly active on the Dutch insurance market. The
     Notifying Party argues that the effects on cross-border trade of the introduction of
     new vehicles able to compete at international level (PPIs) are tangible and that
     international asset managers are actual and potential entrants in the wider pension
     and group life markets. In view of this, the Notifying Party considers the
     Commission to be best placed to assess the Proposed Transaction.
(66) Third, the Notifying Party notes that the Proposed Transaction has effects outside the
     Netherlands, namely in Belgium.
(67) Finally, the Notifying Party notes that, while the Commission is best placed to pursue
     its investigation and assess the case, the referral would put the planned timetable of
     the Proposed Transaction in jeopardy, which is subject to rules governing public
     bids, thus creating uncertainty on the capital market.
6.3. Commission's assessment
(68) As explained above, the Commission considers that the Proposed Transaction does
     not threaten to significantly affect competition in any market presenting all the
     characteristics of a distinct market.
(69) Even if the Proposed Transaction were to be considered to significantly affect
     competition in any of the markets concerned, the Commission is of the opinion that
     there are compelling reasons not to refer this case to the Dutch authorities. These are
     based on the guiding principles.
                                            14

(70)  The Merger Regulation refers to the need to ensure that a case is "dealt with by the
      most appropriate authority".23 Furthermore according to paragraph 9 of the Referral
      Notice "jurisdiction should only be reattributed to another competition authority in
      circumstances where the latter is more appropriate for dealing with the merger,
      having regard to the specific characteristics of the case as well as the tools and
      expertise available to the authority". In this regard, the Referral Notice clarifies that,
      in addition to the likely geographic localisation of the impact on competition of the
      merger, "regard should be had to the implications, in terms of administrative effort,
      of any contemplated referral". Furthermore, as explained in the Referral Notice the
      rules governing the referral of concentrations are designed in such a way as to "take
      due account of legal certainty and the 'one-stop shop' principle". These three
      considerations – which is the most appropriate authority, legal certainty and the one-
      stop shop principle – should therefore also form part of the reasoning in assessing a
      referral request.
(71)  Firstly, the Commission considers itself to be the more appropriate authority to
      assess this case for two main reasons: the need to ensure consistence throughout the
      EU and the fact that the Commission has an extensive experience in the area of
      insurance. As regards the first point, the Commission has a particular interest in
      ensuring that competition is preserved in the same way across the EU. Whilst the
      markets in question are national, most of the changes observed on the Dutch
      insurance market (in particular on the pensions market) in recent years are part of
      wider, international trends. The Commission has a strong interest in ensuring
      consistency in the way the different mergers falling into its competence in the
      insurance sector are assessed throughout the EU based on consistent criteria, in
      particular in view of the fact that the activity of insurers is rarely limited to only one
      country. In order to ensure the consistent approach the Commission must use its
      ability to conduct pan-European, holistic assessments of mergers occurring in these
      sectors.
(72)  In addition, the Commission has significant recent experience in assessing
      concentrations in the insurance sector. For example, in recent years, the Commission
      assessed the following transactions which led to affected markets in the area of
      insurance: Aviva / Friends Life / Telent,24 Canada Life / Irish Life,25 Allianz /
      Insurance Portfolio and Brokerage Services of Gan Eurocourtage, 26 IF P&C
      Insurance Holding / Topdanmark27 and more specifically in the market for pension
      products in case Blackstone / Cambourne / Goldman Sachs/ Rothesay. 28 The
      Commission therefore concludes that, in terms of experience and sector expertise, it
      is at least as well placed as the ACM to assess this case.
(73)  Secondly, there appear to be grounds to suppose that the referral would add to the
      administrative burden placed on the Parties and other market participants, as the
      Commission was close to completing its market investigation at the time of receiving
      the Referral Request. The increased administrative burden is intrinsic in the case
23
      Recital 14 of the Merger Regulation.
24
     COMP M.7478 Aviva/ Friends Life/ Telenet, Commission decision of 13 March 2015
25
     COMP M.6883 Canada Life/ Irish Life, Commission decision of 31 May 2013
26
     COMP M.6649 Allianz/Insurance Portfolio and Brokerage Services of Gan Eurocourtage, Commission
     decision of 23 July 2012
27
     COMP M.6957 IF P&C Insurance Holding/ Topdanmark, Commission decision of 23 September 2013.
28
     COMP M.7044 Blackstone /Cambourne / Goldman Sachs / Rothesay, Commission decision of 29
     November 2013.
                                               15

        referral arrangements, and has to be weighed against possible efficiencies resulting
        from the referral. In the present case, the Commission has conducted a particularly
        far reaching market investigation, including 14 pre-notification calls with various
        market participants, a significant number of requests for information to the Parties
        and to competitors. In total the Commission sent questionnaires to almost 300 market
        participants, and received responses from 60.
(74)    In its letter of 13 March 2017, the Notifying Party also emphasises that a referral at
        this late stage would make it impossible for the Parties to obtain competition
        authority approval before the expiry of the public bid. This would create significant
        uncertainty amongst investors. By granting the referral, the Commission, as part of
        the network of competition authorities, could therefore be seen to be causing
        unjustified harm to the Parties' legitimate competitive interests, without there being
        any overriding reason for such a course of action.
(75)    Thirdly, the principle of legal certainty is an additional argument in favour of not
        referring the case, unless there are compelling reasons to do so. As set out above,
        such compelling reasons are not present in this case. Even absent the assumption that
        the Proposed Transaction does not threaten to significantly affect competition in the
        distinct markets identified, there are strong arguments in favour of the Commission
        keeping the case, in view of which it would be unjustified to take an approach which
        also undermines the legal certainty created by the Merger Regulation.
7.      CONCLUSION
(76)    From the above it follows that the conditions to request a referral under Article
        9(2)(a) Merger Regulation are not met. The Commission therefore decides not to
        refer the case to the Netherlands.
HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION:
                                            Article 1
The Proposed Transaction shall not be referred to the competition authority of the
Netherlands, pursuant to Article 9(3)(a) of the Merger Regulation.
                                            Article 2
This Decision is addressed to the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Done at Brussels, 7.4.2017
                                              For the Commission
                                              (Signed)
                                              Margrethe VESTAGER
                                              Member of the Commission
                                                16
