                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
      In the published version of this decision, some           Brussels, 19.7.2017
      information has been omitted pursuant to Article          C(2017)5229 final
      17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
      concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
      other confidential information. The omissions are
      shown thus […]. Where possible the information
                                                                    PUBLIC VERSION
      omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
      general description.
                                                                To the notifying parties
Subject:             Case M.8251 - Bite / Tele2 / Telia Lietuva / JV
                     Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council
                     Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the
                     European Economic Area2
Dear Sir or Madam,
(1)       On 15 June 2017, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
          concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which the
          undertakings UAB Bite Lietuva ('Bite'), controlled by Providence Equity, UAB
          Tele2 ('Tele2'), belonging to the Tele2 group and Telia Lietuva AB ('Telia'),
          belonging to Telia Company AB acquire within the meaning of Article 3(4) of the
          Merger Regulation joint control of a newly created full-function joint venture
          company (the 'JV') by way of a purchase of shares (hereinafter the 'Transaction').3
          Bite, Tele2 and Telia are collectively designated hereinafter as the 'Notifying
          Parties' and together with the JV as the 'Parties'.
1    OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
     the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
     replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
     the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2    OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
3    Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 198, 22.6.2017, p. 9.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

1.    THE PARTIES AND THE CONCENTRATION
(2)   Bite is a mobile network operator ('MNO') in Lithuania and a provider of
      wholesale and retail mobile telecommunications services and retail sales of
      mobile handsets, tablets and their accessories in Lithuania. Bite also offers certain
      fixed telecommunications services. Bite is ultimately controlled by the US
      investment firm Providence Equity Partners LLC.
(3)   Tele2 is also an MNO and provides wholesale and retail mobile
      telecommunications services and retail sales of mobile handsets, tablets and their
      accessories in Lithuania. It belongs to the Tele2 group, a group of
      telecommunications companies with mobile and fixed telecommunications
      operations in multiple European countries. Tele2 group is de facto controlled by
      the Swedish investment company Kinnevik AB, ultimately controlled by Verdere
      S.à.r.l (Luxembourg).
(4)   Telia is also an MNO and a provider of wholesale and retail mobile and fixed
      electronic communications services in Lithuania. Telia also provides a wide range
      of IT services (such as data centre (colocation) services). Telia belongs to the
      Swedish Telia Company AB which comprises fixed and mobile
      telecommunications companies in Europe and Asia.
(5)   The JV is a newly established and currently empty company. After the
      Transaction, the JV will be engaged in the retail provision of payment services in
      Lithuania and will operate as an electronic money institution and as a payment
      services provider ('PSP'), subject to the regulatory supervision of the Bank of
      Lithuania. In particular, the JV will operate a new mobile payment ecosystem that
      will allow consumers (mobile telephony subscribers of the Notifying Parties) and
      merchants (who enter into an agreement with the JV) to carry out and receive
      mobile payments both within the JV's ecosystem (intra-PSP payments) and to and
      from accounts held at other PSPs (inter-PSP payments). The JV will therefore
      operate as a two-sided platform targeted at consumers on the on one side (by
      means of a mobile app) and merchants on the other side.
(6)   The Transaction concerns the creation of the JV between Bite, Tele2 and Telia.
      Pursuant to the Cooperation Agreement and the Share Sale and Purchase
      Agreement entered into by the Notifying Parties, respectively, on 18 and 27 April
      2017, each of the Notifying Parties will acquire one third of the shares in the JV.
      The Notifying Parties' relationships regarding the management of the JV will be
      governed by a Shareholders Agreement entered into by the Notifying Parties on
      18 April 2017.
 1.1. Joint control
(7)   As a result of the Transaction, each of the Notifying Parties will hold an equal
      amount of shares and voting rights in the JV and will be entitled to appoint one
      third of the members of the JV's supervisory board and management board.
      Commercially strategic decisions of the JV (including those concerning the JV's
      business plan, budget and investments) will be subject to unanimous approval by
      all members of the JV's management board. Accordingly, the Notifying Parties
      will exercise joint control over the JV.
                                               2

  1.2. Full-functionality
(8)     The JV will be a joint venture performing on a lasting basis all the functions of an
        autonomous economic entity.
(9)     First, the JV will have sufficient resources to operate independently on the
        market. In particular, the JV will have access to: (i) dedicated management,
        including a general manager, as well as technical, commercial, regulatory
        directors; (ii) staff, including around […] employees during the initial 2-3 years
        of the JV's operation; (iii) finance, including contributions from the Notifying
        Parties during the JV's initial start-up period, with around EUR […] to be
        contributed by each of the Notifying Parties during the JV's first year; and
        (iv) assets, including technical infrastructure and software solutions, also on the
        basis of […]. In addition, the JV will hold a license (already issued by the Bank of
        Lithuania) allowing it to conduct its activities as an e-money institution in
        Lithuania.
(10)    Second, the JV will perform activities beyond one specific function for the
        parents and will have its own presence on the market as a retail PSP (a market in
        which the Notifying Parties are essentially not active).4 The JV will be
        responsible for the overall management of its mobile payment ecosystem and for
        the execution of payment transactions. It will have direct customer-facing
        interactions (i) with merchants, […] (including the negotiation and conclusion of
        contracts and the provision of customer support services); and (ii) with
        consumers, on a shared basis with the Notifying Parties (by allowing them to
        subscribe through the JV's online subscription channel, download and install the
        JV's app and acquire user and IBAN e-money accounts with the JV, and by
        providing a customer service platform). While the Notifying Parties will also
        partly act as an interface vis-à-vis consumers,5 […]. The services provided by the
        Notifying Parties will be remunerated […].6
(11)    Third, the JV will only have limited sales and purchase relationships with the
        Notifying Parties. The JV's purchases from the Notifying Parties (if any) will
        represent less than 5% of the JV's operational costs (in the case of mobile/fixed
        telecommunications services) or only take place in the initial period of the JV's
        operations (in the case of mobile devices to be installed at merchants' points of
        sale), and will in any event be conducted on an arm's length basis. Moreover,
        while each of the Notifying Parties will have an e-money account with the JV and
        use the JV's services as merchants, revenue from the Notifying Parties, which will
        be just a few of the many expected clients of the JV on the merchant side, will
        only account for a marginal proportion of the JV's revenues.
(12)    Finally, the JV has been established for an indefinite period of time.
4   Save for a small presence as regards so-called payment intermediation services (see paragraphs (17)
    and (23) below).
5   Consumers will be able to subscribe to the JV's payment solution through the Notifying Parties'
    customer service branches. Moreover, […]. The more general brand support and promotion in the
    media of the JV's payment solution will be handled by the JV.
6   […].
                                                       3

(13)    In light of the above, the Transaction constitutes a concentration within the
        meaning of Article 3(4) of the Merger Regulation.
2.      EU DIMENSION
(14)    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
        more than EUR 5 000 million7 (Bite: […] million; Tele2: 11 781 million; Telia: 8
        897 million). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250
        million (Bite: […] million; Tele2: […] million; Telia: […] million), but they do
        not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one
        and the same Member State.
(15)    The Transaction therefore has an EU dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of the
        Merger Regulation.
3.      RELEVANT MARKETS
  3.1. Introduction
(16)    The JV will provide mobile payment services in Lithuania.
(17)    The Notifying Parties currently provide payment intermediation services in
        Lithuania. Moreover, the Notifying Parties all supply retail mobile
        telecommunications services, secure storage, mobile authentication services, and
        mobile communications devices in Lithuania. Only Telia is active in the market
        for the supply of colocation services, while Bite and Telia both provide fixed
        internet access services in Lithuania. These activities are relevant for the
        assessment of a number of vertical and conglomerate relationships between
        certain services provided by the Notifying Parties and the activities of the JV as
        discussed in Section 4.2.
(18)    The Notifying Parties are also active in other markets vertically or otherwise
        related to the activities of the JV. Nonetheless, only the Parties' activities
        mentioned at paragraphs (16) and (17) give rise to potential affected markets as a
        result of the Transaction and therefore in the remainder of this section the relevant
        market definition will be discussed only for such activities.
  3.2. Product market definition
            3.2.1.     Retail provision of mobile payment services
(19)    Retail payments are payment transactions where at least one party to the
        transaction (i.e. the payer, the beneficiary or both) is not a financial institution.
        Hence, retail payments represent all payment transactions which do not take place
        between two banks.8
7   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
8   See Commission’s Green Paper “Towards an integrated European market for card, internet and
    mobile payments”, footnote 1 and Section 2.
                                                        4

(20)    Mobile payment services are retail payments for which the payment data and
        instructions are initiated, transmitted or confirmed via a mobile phone. Mobile
        payments can be classified by the location of the payee and the payer: (i)
        proximity/offline mobile payments when the payer and the payee are in the same
        location and (ii) remote/online payments when that is not the case. The JV will
        provide both offline/proximity and remote/online mobile payments.
(21)    The market for mobile payments has been previously analysed by the
        Commission.9 In the UK MCommerce decision, the Commission considered that
        online and offline mobile payments were not likely to be part of the same relevant
        product market. While the Commission concluded that the situation could evolve
        in the short to medium term, it ultimately left the product market definition
        open.10 With regard to the substitutability of remote/online mobile payments and
        other types of remote/online payments, the Commission concluded that they may
        belong to different product markets, but ultimately also left the product market
        definition open in that respect.11 The Commission reached a similar conclusion in
        relation to the mobile proximity/offline payments and existing proximity/offline
        payment solutions.12 In Telefonica / Caixabank / Banco Santander / JV and in the
        Belgian MCommerce decision, the Commission reached similar conclusions.13
(22)    The Notifying Parties consider that an overall market for retail payments
        transaction services, which comprises remote/online and proximity/offline mobile
        payment services, as well as other existing non-mobile remote/online and
        proximity/offline payment solutions, should be defined for the purposes of the
        Transaction.14 Alternatively, they propose that proximity/offline payments
        (mobile and non-mobile) and remote/online payments (mobile and non-mobile)
        belong to separate product markets.15
(23)    As mentioned, the Notifying Parties currently provide also payment
        intermediation services, which is a so-called 'payment over invoice' solution
        where customers can pay bus or parking tickets by sending an SMS that is then
        reflected in the customers' mobile invoice. In the Commission's precedent these
        services have been considered as part of the market for remote/online mobile
        payments.16 The Notifying Parties submit that payment intermediation services
        are likely to belong to a separate relevant market because they are unlikely to be
9  The main difference between mobile payments and mobile wallets is that, while mobile wallets are
   limited to hosting several means of payment provided by third parties, mobile payment services cover
   all the necessary steps to execute the payment transaction. See Commission decision of 4 September
   2012 in case M.6314 – Telefónica UK / Vodafone UK / Everything Everywhere / JV (hereinafter the
   'UK MCommerce decision'; see Commission decision of 14 August 2013 in case M.6956 – Telefonica /
   Caixabank / Banco Santander / JV, see Commission decision of 11 October 2013 in case M.6967 –
   BNP Paribas Fortis / Belgacom / Belgian Mobile Wallet (hereinafter the 'Belgian MCommerce
   decision').
10 See the UK MCommerce decision, recital 139.
11 See the UK MCommerce decision, recital 135.
12 See the UK MCommerce decision, recital 127;
13 See Commission decision of 14 August 2013 in case M.6956 – Telefonica / Caixabank / Banco
   Santander / JV, paragraphs 30-37; see the Belgian MCommerce decision, paragraphs 43-48. In the
   Belgian MCommerce decision, the market investigation provided mixed results with respect to the
   question whether mobile payment services constitute a separate market from existing offline payments.
14 Form CO, paragraph 361.
15 Form CO, paragraph 362.
16 See the Belgian MCommerce decision, paragraph 27.
                                                      5

       substitutable with the payment services provided by the JV and other players in
       the market from the merchants' perspective.17
(24)   In the present case, the Commission investigated the exact scope of the relevant
       market for mobile payment services, as this is the only segment that the JV is
       active in and its position would be weaker in any potentially wider market. The
       results of its assessment are summarised in the following paragraphs.
(25)   As regards the general distinction between proximity/offline and remote/online
       payment services, respondents to the market investigation provided mixed
       responses with regard to the demand side substitutability of these services.
       Among the respondents who expressed a view, some stated that consumers would
       not regard a remote payment as an alternative when wishing to make a proximity
       payment, while others considered both types of payments as part of the broader
       payment service market.18 As regards supply side substitutability, most
       respondents expressed the view that a company offering proximity/offline
       payments would not be able to start offering online/remote payments in the short
       term and without significant investments.19 Finally, the majority of respondents
       who expressed a view did not agree with the statement that proximity/offline and
       remote/online payments are equally safe in terms of data security and fraud
       prevention.20
(26)   As regards the distinction between mobile and non-mobile proximity/offline
       payment services, the majority of the respondents to the market investigation
       considered that non-mobile proximity payment services (such as traditional or
       NFC-enabled payment cards or cash) and proximity/offline mobile payment
       services are substitutable from the demand side perspective.21 For example, one
       respondent argued that "the service level (execution response time) is similar from
       consumer perspective – similar number of steps needs to be taken in order to
       complete the transaction". Respondents however considered that these services
       were not substitutes from the supply side perspective, as significant investments
       and time would be required for a company offering a non-mobile proximity
       payment solution to offer a mobile proximity solution.22 In particular, several
       respondents commented that the infrastructure required to support mobile
       payments would be a significant part of those investments.
(27)   As regards the distinction between mobile and non-mobile remote/online
       payment services, the results of the market investigation were not conclusive as
       regards demand side substitutability.23 Among those respondents which
       considered substitutability to be limited, some cited the need for another device as
       one limiting factor. The market investigation also did not deliver conclusive
       results as regards the supply-side substitutability of mobile remote payments apps
       and non-mobile remote payment solutions. For example, a respondent mentioned
       that "development, launching, and marketing of a new payment method like a
17 Form CO, paragraph 364.
18 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 11.
19 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 18.
20 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 12.
21 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 7.
22 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 14.
23 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 8.
                                                        6

       mobile remote payment app [is] a significant and time consuming endeavor. The
       process involves new integrations with existing systems and creation of
       completely new interface", while another considered that the feasibility of such
       development "[d]epends on concrete use case but should be relatively easy".24
(28)   As regards the distinction between proximity/offline and remote/online mobile
       payment services, the results of the market investigation were not conclusive
       with respect to demand side substitutability. Among the respondents which
       considered substitutability limited, some cited as reasons limiting substitutability
       the time needed to complete the transaction.25 Respondents were however of the
       view that both services are substitutes from the supply-side perspective.26 For
       example, a respondent stated that "[m]inimal efforts in time and investment will
       be required since all major investments would have been made already".
(29)   As regards the distinction between mobile online/remote payment apps and
       other mobile online/remote payment solutions (such as through a mobile
       internet browser), most respondents agreed that these two solutions were suitable
       alternatives from the demand side, despite a few indicating that the convenience
       of apps is greater.27 The market investigation however delivered mixed results as
       regards the supply-side substitutability of both solutions.28
(30)   As regards the distinction between mobile remote/online payment apps and
       payment intermediation services, the majority of respondents to the market
       investigation considered them as a suitable substitute from the demand side.29
       Regarding the supply side substitutability, the market investigation provided
       indications that a company already offering payment intermediation solutions
       would not be able to start offering mobile payment solutions in the short term and
       without significant investments.30
(31)   For the purpose of this decision, the Commission considers that the exact product
       market definition can be left open, since the Transaction does not raise serious
       doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market under any plausible product
       market definition. The Commission will undertake the assessment of the effects
       of the Transaction in the possible product markets for the retail provision of (i)
       mobile payment services overall, (ii) proximity/offline mobile payments and (iii)
       remote/online mobile payments (including or not payment intermediation
       services). Since the JV will only be active in mobile payment services, the JV's
       presence in any potentially wider market would be weaker.
            3.2.2.     Secure storage for mobile payment services
(32)   Mobile payment solutions require access to a secure storage solution in order to
       ensure the secure functioning of the payments application. Secure storage is
       implemented by means of a Secure Element ('SE'), which is a piece of hardware
       and software (or only software where the SE is cloud-based) capable of securely
24 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 15.
25 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 6.
26 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 13.
27 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 9.
28 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 16.
29 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 10.
30 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 17.
                                                        7

        hosting software applications and their confidential and cryptographic data. The
        SE can take the form of a variety of technological solutions including (i) in the
        SIM card, (ii) in the mobile device (embedded SE), (iii) in an external device (i.e.
        USB stick), (iv) on a (micro)Secure Digital (SD) card, and (v) on the cloud,
        which requires to a certain extent a secure environment in the mobile device to
        ensure the integrity of the transactions.31
(33)    In the UK MCommerce decision, the Commission considered that the relevant
        market for secure storage included SIM-based SE solutions and at least embedded
        SEs placed within the mobile device. In that decision, the Commission left open
        the possibility that SEs on external devices (USB sticks) and cloud-based
        solutions belong to the same relevant product market.32 The Commission found
        that, while SEs embedded in a mobile handset have shown to be a close substitute
        for a SIM-based SE, cloud-based secure storage and additional hardware
        containing SEs attached to the mobile handset were not perfect substitutes for
        SIM-based SE.33
(34)    The Notifying Parties submit that if a separate relevant product market for secure
        storage was defined, it would comprise all the above-mentioned alternatives for
        storing secure information.34
(35)    The market investigation provided indications that secure storage solutions other
        than SIM-cards may provide an alternative for the provision of mobile payment
        services. For example, one respondent highlighted that "[t]here can be security
        elements other than SIM-cards", while another respondent stated that "[t]here are
        alternative mobile payment technologies that fit these criteria and do not rely on
        the device’s SIM […]." Several other respondents confirmed the existence of
        such alternatives, naming in particular SE storage embedded in the mobile
        device.35
(36)    For the purpose of this decision, the Commission considers that the exact product
        market definition, i.e. whether SIM-based SE and alternative SEs belong to the
        same product market, can be left open, since the Transaction does not raise
        serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market under any plausible
        product market definition.
             3.2.3.    Mobile authentication and signature services
(37)    Mobile authentication and signature services are electronic trust services that can
        be used for mobile transactions, such as mobile payments.36
31 See UK MCommerce decision, recital 54.
32 See UK MCommerce decision, recital 255.
33 See UK MCommerce decision, recitals 110-115.
34 Annex 30 to the Form CO, paragraph 7.
35 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 24.
36 See for example, "Security guidelines on the appropriate use of qualified electronic signatures.
   Guidance for users", European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA),
   December 2016. The functions that these services provide include, but are not limited to, user
   authentication (enabling the electronic identification), integrity (assurance that the data have not been
   altered) and confidentiality (by electronic encryption).
                                                         8

(38)    A type of mobile authentication and signature services available in Lithuania is
        the "mobile signature" service or "mobile-ID" offered by the MNOs.37 Other
        services available in Lithuania that provide electronic authentication and
        signature for mobile transactions include Smart ID (another mobile authentication
        and signature service recently launched in Lithuania),38 authentication codes
        generators and secure passwords. Furthermore, biometric authentication tools,
        such as iris- and fingerprint-scanning, could be used for mobile payments.39
(39)    The Commission has not previously defined a relevant product market for mobile
        authentication and signature services.
(40)    The Notifying Parties argue that mobile signature (or mobile-IDs) services in
        Lithuania should be included within the relevant product market for retail mobile
        telecommunications services in Lithuania because they can be purchased jointly
        with other mobile telecommunications services and only mobile operators offer
        them.40 If they were not considered to be part of the retail mobile
        telecommunications market, the Notifying Parties argue that alternative
        authentication solutions (such as Smart ID) could potentially be viewed as
        substitutable for mobile signatures, although only mobile signatures contain
        qualified certificates in the meaning of the eIDAS regulation.41
(41)    The market investigation provided mixed results in relation to the substitutability
        of mobile signatures with other means of authentication for mobile payments.42
        Some respondents emphasised that mobile signatures are more convenient than
        other authentication solutions, while others pointed at the existence of
        alternatives. One respondent stated that "[m]obile signature implies that person’s
        identity has been verified: if a person uses it, one can be sure of it. Using
        alternative solutions will require the parties to rely on other means of
        establishing payers/payee identities before validating such payment.". However,
        another respondent argued that "[f]or both proximity and remote mobile
        payments, there are alternative cardholder / user authentication methods,
        ranging from biometrics (fingerprint, iris scanning) to passcode or PIN on the
        POS."
(42)    The Commission notes that mobile signatures (or mobile-IDs) are not widely used
        today in Lithuania (in 2016 their uptake was less than […]% of active mobile
        subscribers and the expected uptake in 2017 is less than […]%)43 and some
37 It constitutes a general purpose electronic authentication and signature tool for a natural person and is
   securely stored within a SIM card of a mobile device, see Form CO, paragraph 607.
38 See https://www.smart-id.com/about-smart-id/ and non-confidential minutes of the meeting with the
   Bank of Lithuania of 26 June 2017, questions 9 and 12.
39 For example, Apple Pay uses fingerprint scanning to authenticate the user
   (https://www.apple.com/apple-pay/). It has not yet launched in Lithuania (see Form CO, paragraph
   588).
40 Form CO, paragraphs 380-383.
41 Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 on
   electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the internal market and
   repealing Directive 1999/93/EC, OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 73–114. See Annex 30 to the Form CO,
   paragraphs 23-24.
42 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 25.
43 See Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's Request for Information n.6 of 6 July 2017, question
   2 and Form CO, paragraph 190.
                                                        9

       players, such as banks, already offer mobile payment solutions that do not rely on
       the mobile signature services used by the Notifying Parties.44 The Commission
       also notes that other means of authentication could in the future comply with the
       requirements of the eIDAS regulation for qualified certificates for electronic
       signatures. A respondent to the market investigation has indicated that, under the
       current draft law which transposes in Lithuania an EU anti-money laundering
       directive, it is foreseen that client identification by remote measures would not be
       limited only to the (so far not widely used) mobile signature services offered by
       the Lithuanian MNOs.45
(43)   For the purpose of this decision, the Commission considers that the exact product
       market definition can be left open, i.e. whether mobile signature services are part
       of a wider market for mobile authentication and signature services, since the
       Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
       market under any plausible product market definition.
            3.2.4.     Colocation services
(44)   Colocation services are building, power, cooling, connectivity and security
       services provided in data centres (dedicated facilities sometimes purpose-built) in
       which companies house and operate IT equipment that supports their business
       (such as servers and data storage).46 Colocation services can be provided in-
       house, or by third-party providers.
(45)   In Equinix / Telecity, the Commission concluded that the relevant product market
       comprises only colocation services provided by third party data centres
       (excluding in-house data centres) without further segmenting depending on the
       operator providing the services (carrier-neutral and carrier-owned data centres,
       wholesale and retail operators) or the type of customers.47
(46)   The Notifying Parties agree with the Commission's precedent.48
(47)   For the purpose of this decision, in line with Equinix / Telecity, the Commission
       considers that the relevant product market comprises colocation services provided
       by third party data centres without any further segmentation.
            3.2.5.     Retail mobile telecommunications services
(48)   Mobile telecommunications services to end customers or 'retail mobile
       telecommunications services' include services for national and international
       mobile voice calls, SMS (including MMS and other messages), mobile Internet
44 See non-confidential minutes of the meeting with the Bank of Lithuania of 26 June 2017, question 9.
45 See replies to questionnaire Q5 of 16 June 2017 to associations.
46 See Commission decision of 13 November 2015 in Case M.7678 – Equinix / Telecity, paragraph 6.
47 See Commission decision of 13 November 2015 in Case M.7678 – Equinix / Telecity, paragraphs 11-
   26.
48 Form CO, paragraph 425.
                                                       10

        access, access to content via the mobile network and retail international roaming
        services.49
(49)    In previous cases, the Commission defined the market for retail mobile
        telecommunications services as one overall market constituting a separate market
        from retail fixed telecommunication services, given that from a supply-side
        perspective all mobile operators are capable of providing the different types of
        mobile services to all types of customers.50 The Commission did not further
        subdivide the overall market for retail mobile telecommunications services based
        on the type of service (voice calls, SMS, MMS, mobile Internet data services), or
        the type of network technology (such as 2G, 3G and 4G). The Commission
        reflected upon a possible segmentation of the overall market for retail mobile
        telecommunications services according to the type of contract (pre-paid or post-
        paid services) and the type of customer (residential customers or business
        customers) but ultimately took the view that these segmentations did not
        constitute separate product markets but represent rather market segments within
        an overall market.51
(50)    The Notifying Parties agree with the Commission's precedents.52
(51)    For the purpose of this decision, in line with its precedents, the Commission
        considers that the relevant product market is the overall market for retail mobile
        telecommunications services.
            3.2.6.    Retail sale of mobile communications devices
(52)    In previous cases, the Commission has examined the market for the retail sale of
        electronic products and appliances and it has assessed whether such market could
        be further segmented into retail sale of computers and communication devices,
        and further sub-segments therein, but ultimately left the precise product market
49 See for example Commission decision of 10 October 2014 in Case M.7000 – Liberty Global/Ziggo,
   recital 137; Commission decision of 3 August 2016 in Case M.7978 – Vodafone / Liberty
   Global/Dutch JV, paragraph 70.
50 See Commission decision of 11 May 2016 in Case M.7612 – Hutchison 3G UK/Telefónica UK, recital
   252; Commission decision of 10 October 2014 in Case M.7000 – Liberty Global/Ziggo, recital 141 and
   Commission decision of 2 July 2014 in Case M.7018 – Telefónica Deutschland/E-Plus, recital 64.
51 See Commission decision of 3 August 2016 in Case M.7978 – Vodafone / Liberty Global/Dutch JV,
   paragraphs 73-74; Commission decision of 11 May 2016 in Case M.7612 – Hutchison 3G
   UK/Telefónica UK, recitals 255, 261, 270, 279, 287; Commission decision of 2 July 2014 in Case
   M.7018 – Telefónica Deutschland/E-Plus, recitals 31 to 55; Commission decision of 10 October 2014
   in Case M.7000 – Liberty Global/Ziggo, recital 141; Commission decision of 28 May 2014 in Case
   M.6992 – Hutchison 3G UK/Telefónica Ireland, recital 141; Commission decision of 12 December
   2012 in Case M.6497 – Hutchison 3G Austria/Orange Austria, recital 58.
   In past cases the Commission assessed whether the provision of mobile telecommunications services
   to business and private customers constituted separate product markets or rather segments of the
   overall retail market for mobile telecommunications services and concluded, for the purpose of the
   assessment of those cases, that they would constitute segments within the retail mobile
   telecommunications market (see Commission decision of 11 May 2016 in Case M.7612 – Hutchison
   3G UK/Telefónica UK, recitals 276-279; Commission decision of 2 July 2014 in Case M.7018 –
   Telefónica Deutschland/E-Plus, recitals 33-36). Such segmentation is not relevant for the case at hand
   as the assessment would not change, the Notifying Parties holding similar market shares under any
   possible market definition.
52 Form CO, paragraphs 378-379.
                                                     11

       definition open.53 The Commission did not consider a possible segmentation
       between residential and business customers.
(53)   The Notifying Parties consider that the relevant product market may be defined as
       one overall product market for the retail sale of mobile communication devices
       (mobile phones, including smartphones, and tablets), without the need of further
       segmentations by type of product, distributional channel or type of retailer.54
(54)   For the purpose of this decision, the Commission considers that the exact product
       market definition can be left open, since the Transaction does not raise serious
       doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market under any plausible product
       market definition. Given that the JV will provide mobile payment services via a
       mobile app and the Notifying Parties are engaged in the retail sale of mobile
       communication devices, the Commission will undertake the assessment of the
       effects of the Transaction related to the Notifying Parties' presence in the potential
       market segment of the retail sale of smartphones and potential sub-segments, such
       as those analysed by the Commission in Carphone Warehouse/Dixons (such as by
       distribution channel, by the focus of the retailer's business), as the Notifying
       Parties' presence in any potentially wider market would be weaker.55
            3.2.7.    Retail market for fixed Internet access services
(55)   Internet access services at the retail level consist of the provision of a fixed
       telecommunications link enabling customers to access the Internet.
(56)   In previous cases, the Commission determined an overall market for the retail
       provision of fixed Internet access services without a further subdivision based on
       download speed or type of technology.56 In Altice / PT Portugal, the Commission
       left open the question whether the market should be further segmented between
       residential and business customers.57 In other decisions, the Commission referred
       to retail broadband Internet access services for large business customers as the
       market for retail business connectivity services.58
(57)   The Notifying Parties agree with the Commission's precedents.59
53 See Commission decision of 25 June 2014 in Case M.7259 - Carphone Warehouse/Dixons, paragraphs
   16-19 and 24; Commission decision of 29 June 2006 in Case M.4226 - DGSI/Fotovista, paragraphs 9
   to 14; Commission Decision of 7 October 2016 Case M.8131 - Tele2 Sverige/TDC Sverige, paragraphs
   59-60.
54 Form CO, paragraphs 393-399.
55 The Notifying Parties' activities in the potential market for the retail sale of tablets, and potential sub-
   segments, do not give rise to affected markets. See Commission decision of 25 June 2014 in Case
   M.7259 - Carphone Warehouse/Dixons, paragraphs 16-24.
56 See Commission decision of 29 June 2010 in Case M.5532 – Carphone Warehouse/Tiscali UK,
   paragraphs 7-21; Commission decision of 20 September 2013 in Case M.6990 – Vodafone/Kabel
   Deutschland, paragraphs 192-194; Commission Decision of 7 October 2016 Case M.8131 - Tele2
   Sverige / TDC Sverige, paragraphs 31-33; Commission Decision of 3 August 2016 in Case M.7978 –
   Vodafone / Liberty Global/Dutch JV, paragraphs 36-38.
57 See Commission decision of 20 April 2015 in Case M.7499 – Altice / PT Portugal, paragraphs 19-21.
58 See Commission decision of 2 July 2014 in Case M.7231 – Vodafone/ONO, paragraph 18;
   Commission decision of 19 May 2015 in Case M.7421 – Orange/Jazztel, recital 42.
59 Form CO, paragraphs 409-414.
                                                        12

(58)    For the purpose of this decision, the Commission considers that the relevant
        product market is the market for the provision of retail fixed Internet access
        services.60
  3.3. Geographic market definition
             3.3.1.     Retail provision of mobile payment services
(59)    Previous Commission precedents, while keeping the geographic market definition
        open, considered the market to be at least national in scope.61
(60)    The Notifying Parties agree with the Commission's precedents and consider that
        the geographic scope of the relevant markets comprises the territory of
        Lithuania.62 The JV's ecosystem will be offered to customers in Lithuania and
        other payment services providers also operate throughout the entire country. If
        anything, according to the Notifying Parties, the geographic market could be
        broader than national as some competitors operate across multiple countries.63
(61)    The market investigation provided mixed views with regard to the geographic
        scope of the market for retail mobile payment services and most respondents did
        not express a view as to whether there are differences in customer demand and/or
        requirements for retail mobile payments in Lithuania compared to the rest of the
        EEA.64 Some respondents highlighted that there exist different levels of uptake of
        these services across the European Union.
(62)    For the purpose of this decision, the Commission considers that the exact
        geographic market definition, i.e. whether national or broader, can be left open,
        since the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
        internal market under any plausible geographic market definition.
             3.3.2.     Secure storage for mobile payment services
(63)    In the UK MCommerce decision, the Commission considered that the geographic
        scope of the market for secure storage for mobile payment services was at least
        national, while it left the exact geographic market definition open. The
        Commission noted that, while the provision of SIM-based SE secure storage
        seemed to be connected to the retail market for mobile telecommunications
        services (of national scope), other secure storage solutions (such as embedded SE)
        could have a wider scope, as most manufacturers are active globally.65
(64)    The Notifying Parties did not provide any observation in this regard.
60  Excluding access provided to large businesses, enterprise and public sector customers (retail business
    connectivity services).
61  The UK MCommerce decision, recitals 220-224; the Belgian MCommerce decision, paragraphs 54-57;
    Commission decision of 14 August 2013 in case M.6956 – Telefonica / Caixabank / Banco Santander /
    JV, paragraphs 38-40.
62  Form CO, paragraphs 430-431.
63  Form CO, paragraphs 431-432.
64  See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 19.
65  See UK MCommerce decision, recitals 215-217.
                                                        13

(65)  The Commission considers, in line with the UK MCommerce decision, that the
      geographic scope of the market for secure storage could be wider than national, as
      suppliers of non-SIM-based SE solutions are usually active worldwide. On the
      other hand, the Commission acknowledges that SIM-based SEs are issued by
      mobile operators (who serve the national market of retail mobile
      telecommunications) and therefore the relevant market could have a national
      scope.
(66)  For the purpose of this decision, the Commission considers that the exact
      geographic market definition, i.e. whether national or wider, can be left open,
      since the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
      internal market under any plausible geographic market definition. Given that the
      Notifying Parties are active in the provision of SIM cards in Lithuania and their
      presence in a possible wider geographic market would be weaker, the
      Commission will undertake the assessment of the effects of the Transaction only
      at national level.
          3.3.3.    Mobile authentication and signature services
(67)  The Notifying Parties argue that mobile signature services should be included in
      the market for retail mobile telecommunications services and would therefore
      have a national scope.66
(68)  The Commission notes that mobile authentication and signature services are also
      provided by international players (such as Apple Pay) in several countries.
      Nonetheless, the Commission also notes that there are indications that mobile
      authentication and signature services would rather have a national scope because
      of national legislative or regulatory barriers. For example, the mobile signature
      services offered by the Notifying Parties are the result of an agreement with a
      national public authority at the national level and are provided nationally.67
(69)  For the purpose of this decision, the exact geographic market definition, i.e.
      whether national or wider, can be left open, since the Transaction does not raise
      serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market under any plausible
      geographic market definition. Given that the Notifying Parties are active in the
      provision of mobile authentication and signature services only in Lithuania and
      their presence in a possible wider geographic market would be weaker, the
      Commission will undertake the assessment of the effects of the Transaction only
      at national level.
          3.3.4.    Colocation services
(70)  In Equinix / Telecity, the Commission concluded that the relevant geographic
      market encompassed each relevant metropolitan area ('metro', corresponding to a
      radius of around 50 km from the city centre). This was in particular because most
      customers seemed to target very specific metros when seeking to source
66 Form CO, paragraphs 380-384 and 435-436.
67 Form CO, paragraph 611 and footnote 350.
                                               14

       colocation services and that the different metros did not appear to be substitutable
       from the demand side.68
(71)   The Notifying Parties agree with the Commission's precedent.
(72)   For the purpose of this decision, in line with the findings of Equinix / Telecity, the
       Commission considers that the relevant geographic market encompasses each
       relevant metropolitan area (corresponding to a radius of around 50 km from the
       city centre). More precisely, since Telia's data centres are located in Vilnius, the
       relevant geographic market therefore comprises the territory corresponding to a
       radius of around 50 km from the city centre of Vilnius (the 'Vilnius metropolitan
       area').69
            3.3.5.   Retail mobile telecommunications services
(73)   In past cases, the Commission found that the market for retail mobile
       telecommunications services was national in scope.70
(74)   The Notifying Parties agree with the Commission's precedents and submit that the
       scope of the relevant market for mobile communications services corresponds to
       the territory of Lithuania.71
(75)   For the purpose of this decision, the Commission considers that the relevant
       geographic market consists of the territory of Lithuania.
            3.3.6.   Retail sale of mobile communications devices
(76)   In Carphone Warehouse/Dixons, the Commission considered whether the retail
       market for the sale of mobile communication devices and accessories is national
       or local in scope, but ultimately left the question open.72
(77)   The Notifying Parties consider that the relevant geographic market is at least
       national in scope and corresponds to the territory of Lithuania. In the Notifying
       Parties’ view, the definition of narrower, local geographic markets is not
       warranted because the Notifying Parties and their competitors operate on a
       national scale and nation-wide pricing policies apply.73
(78)   For the purpose of this decision, the exact geographic market definition can be
       left open, since the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
       compatibility with the internal market under any plausible geographic market
       definition.
68 See Commission decision of 13 November 2015 in Case M.7678 – Equinix / Telecity, paragraphs 27-
   37.
69 Form CO, paragraph 447.
70 See Commission decision of 11 may 2016 in case M.7612 – Hutchison 3G UK/Telefónica UK, recitals
   293; Commission decision of 10 October 2014 in Case M.7000 – Liberty Global/Ziggo, recital 143;
   Commission decision of 2 July 2014 in case No M.7018 – Telefónica Deutschland/E-Plus, recital 74;
   Commission decision in case M.6497 – Hutchison 3G Austria/Orange Austria, recital 73; Commission
   decision of 28 May 2014 in case No M.6992 – Hutchison 3G UK/Telefónica Ireland, recital 164.
71 Form CO, paragraphs 435-436.
72 See Commission decision of 25 June 2014 in Case M.7259 - Carphone Warehouse/Dixons, paragraphs
   30-33.
73 Form CO, paragraphs 438-439.
                                                   15

              3.3.7.    Retail market for fixed Internet access services
(79)     In its previous decisions, the Commission found that the retail market for the
         provision of fixed Internet services is national in scope.74
(80)     The Notifying Parties agree with the Commission's precedents and submit that the
         scope of the relevant market for fixed Internet access services corresponds to the
         territory of Lithuania.75
(81)     In the light of the above, the Commission considers that the relevant geographic
         market consists of the territory of Lithuania.
4.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
  4.1. Introduction
(82)     The markets for the provision of mobile payment services in Lithuania, especially
         mobile proximity services, are still nascent and in its early development. In this
         context the Commission notes that the Transaction, by introducing a new player,
         will allow for a faster development of these markets. In any event the market
         entry resulting from the Transaction will increase the competitiveness of the
         existing payment service markets in Lithuania, and is therefore likely to have pro-
         competitive effects. This is highlighted by evidence in the Commission's file
         demonstrating that absent the Transaction the Notifying Parties would not have
         made the investments to enter the market unilaterally.
(83)     The Commission has nonetheless investigated whether as a result of the
         Transaction the Notifying Parties could have the ability and/or incentive to
         foreclose rival mobile payment providers in the markets for the provision of
         mobile payment services. It has further assessed what the overall likely impact on
         effective competition of any such potential foreclosure strategy would be. Indeed,
         the Transaction gives rise to a series of non-horizontally affected markets in view
         of the Notifying Parties' market positions in the provision of secure storage for
         mobile payment services, mobile authentication and signature services, colocation
         services, retail mobile telecommunication services and retail sale of mobile
         communications devices.76
(84)     In addition, after the Transaction, the Notifying Parties will retain their activities
         in a number of markets that are either part of, upstream of or neighbouring to the
         market for the retail supply of mobile payment services in Lithuania, in which the
74  See Commission decision of 29 June 2010 in Case M.5532 – Carphone Warehouse/Tiscali UK,
    paragraph 47; Commission decision of 29 January 2010 in Case M.5730 – Telefonica/Hansenet,
    paragraph 28; Commission decision of 20 September 2013 in Case M.6990 – Vodafone/Kabel
    Deutschland, paragraph 197; Commission Decision of 7 October 2016 Case M.8131 - Tele2 Sverige /
    TDC Sverige, paragraphs 35-36; Commission Decision of 3 August 2016 in Case M.7978 – Vodafone /
    Liberty Global/Dutch JV, paragraphs 39-40.
75 Form CO, paragraphs 441-445.
76 As regards the horizontal overlaps between the Notifying Parties' activities and the JV activities in the
    retail provision of payment services overall or in the provision of remote payment services, should
    these markets include payment intermediation services (see paragraphs (23), (30) and (31)), given the
    negligible market shares of the Notifying Parties, the Transaction does not result in any affected
    market.
                                                       16

        JV will operate. In accordance with Article 2(4) of the Merger Regulation, the
        Commission has undertaken an assessment of whether the JV would create scope
        for coordination among the Notifying Parties on any of these markets (see Section
        4.3).
(85)    Finally, the Commission notes that the JV will collect data on its customers as
        part of its activities as a provider of mobile payment services. First, the data
        collected by the JV will include certain information that consumers and
        merchants will be required to provide when subscribing to the JV's services for
        purposes of identification and compliance with regulatory requirements.77
        Second, the JV will collect certain data on the usage of mobile payment services
        by its consumers and merchants, such as account top-up data, account balance
        data, as well as data on volume and value of transactions run via the JV's
        platform. The data collected by the JV will be stored in accordance with
        applicable regulations.78
(86)    The Notifying Parties submit that they do not intend to monetise the data
        collected by the JV, including by means of advertising, and, indeed, no such
        monetisation projects are envisaged under the JV's business plan submitted to the
        Commission.
(87)    In any event, the Commission notes that, post-Transaction, the JV and the
        Notifying Parties will be subject to the relevant national data protection rules79
        and, as of 25 May 2018, to the EU General Data Protection Regulation,80 with
        respect to the collection, processing, storage and usage of personal data. These
        rules, subject to certain exceptions, limit companies' ability to process the datasets
        that they have access to.81
(88)    Furthermore, even if the JV would start monetising the data it collects from its
        customers (for example, by providing advertising services based on those data),82
        it appears that competition concerns would be unlikely to arise from the
        Transaction as regards advertising or other products or services that rely on user
        data. Indeed, the input from the market investigation conducted in the present
        case indicates that other providers of payment services in Lithuania also collect
        data from their respective users.83 As a result, after the Transaction, there will
        continue to be a large amount of user data that are valuable for monetisation
77 These include the applicable 'know-you-customer' and 'anti-money laundering' regulation, Directive
   (EU) 2015/847 and Directive (EU) 2015/849.
78 See footnote 77 above.
79 National rules aimed at transposing Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of
   24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and the
   free movement of such data ('Data Protection Directive'), OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, pp. 31-39. Article
   7(b)-(f) of the Data Protection Directive lays out the situations where the personal data of a data
   subject may be processed without the consent of the data subject.
80 Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the
   protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement
   of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC ('GDPR'), repealing the Data Protection Directive, OJ
   L 119, 4.5.2016, pp. 1-88.
81 The GDPR provides for a harmonised and high level of protection of personal data and fully regulates
   the processing of personal data in the EU, including inter alia the collection, use of, access to and
   portability of personal data as well as the possibilities to transmit or to transfer personal data.
82 Assuming that monetisation would be allowed under the applicable data protection rules.
83 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, questions 2.5 and 3.5.
                                                          17

         purposes and that are not within the JV's exclusive control. Accordingly, the
         effects of the potential monetisation by the JV of the data it will collect from its
         users will not be discussed further in this decision.
(89)     In the following sections, the Commission will, first, assess the potential non-
         horizontal effects arising from the Transaction (Section 4.2) and, subsequently,
         the potential cooperative effects of the JV (Section 4.3).
  4.2. Non-horizontal effects on the market for mobile payment services in
         Lithuania
(90)     The Transaction gives rise to a number of vertical and conglomerate relationships
         between certain services provided by the Notifying Parties and the activities of
         the JV.
(91)     In particular, the Notifying Parties hold a market share above 30% under certain
         possible market definitions with respect to the provision of (i) secure storage for
         mobile payment services, (ii) mobile authentication and signature services, (iii)
         colocation services in the Vilnius area and (iv) retail mobile telecommunications
         services in Lithuania, which can be considered as important inputs for the
         provision of mobile payment services in Lithuania within the meaning of
         paragraphs 31 and 34 of the Non-Horizontal Guidelines.
(92)     Likewise, the Notifying Parties hold a market position above 30% under certain
         possible market definitions with respect to the provision of (i) secure storage for
         mobile payment services, (ii) mobile authentication and signature services, and
         (iv) retail mobile telecommunications services in Lithuania, as well as with
         respect to (v) the retail sale of mobile communications devices in Lithuania,
         which can be considered complementary or at least closely related products to
         mobile payment services in Lithuania within the meaning of paragraph 91 of the
         Non-Horizontal Guidelines.
(93)     The Commission has therefore assessed whether the Transaction could confer on
         the Notifying Parties the ability and the incentive to reduce competition in the
         markets for the provision of mobile payment services in Lithuania by (i)
         restricting access to an important input to the JV competitors and/or (ii)
         leveraging their market positions in any of the complementary or related markets
         to the provision of mobile payment services.84
4.2.1. Foreclosure concerns related to the supply of secure storage for mobile payment
         services
4.2.1.1. Market shares
(94)     The market for the provision of secure storage for mobile payment services is still
         a nascent market in Lithuania. The Commission notes that in the narrowest
         market definition including only SIM based SE in Lithuania the Notifying Parties'
         would not be present as such (since they do not actually supply any secure storage
84  The Commission has assessed potential anticompetitive effects in the market for the provision of
    mobile payment services in Lithuania. The Commission notes that its analysis would not be materially
    different for the markets for: (i) proximity/offline mobile payment services in Lithuania, and (ii)
    remote/online mobile payment services in Lithuania.
                                                       18

        solution themselves). However, given their market position in the retail market
        for mobile telecommunications services in Lithuania, for the provision of which
        they distribute SIM cards and which collectively amounts to a market share of
        close to 100%, they would be in the position to control access to (almost) all the
        SIM cards on which any SIM-based SE solution would be based.
4.2.1.2. Notifying Parties' view
(95)    The Notifying Parties admit that being issuers of the SIM cards, they do control
        access to them and, as a result, they would have the ability to foreclose access to
        SIM-based SEs.85 At the same time, the Notifying Parties submit that they would
        not be in a position to substantially foreclose rival mobile payment service
        providers as these rivals could resort to using alternative SEs which cannot be
        blocked or degraded by the Notifying Parties.86 The JV will not rely on an SE
        placed in the SIM card for the provision of mobile payment services.87
4.2.1.3. Commission's assessment
(96)    The Commission considers that post-Transaction the Notifying Parties would not
        have the ability and the incentives to foreclose competing providers of mobile
        payment services in Lithuania through foreclosure strategies related to secure
        storage for the following reasons.
(97)    First, while each of the Notifying Parties has the ability to foreclose access to
        SIM-based SE, and even if SIM-based SE were to be considered a separate
        market, the JV's rivals could rely on alternative technological solutions to
        securely store information, such as an embedded SE, which would exert an
        important constraint.
(98)    In this regard, as mentioned in paragraph (95), the Commission notes that the
        Notifying Parties themselves do not plan that the JV will rely on a SIM-based SE.
(99)    Moreover, the majority of the respondents to the market investigation stated that
        access to the SIM-based SE is not important and essential for the provision of
        mobile payment services, as the SE can be placed in other locations, such as
        embedded in the mobile device, and that these alternative technological solutions
        provide effective alternatives to SIM-based SE. A minority of respondents stated
        that access to the SIM-based SE is important for the provision of mobile payment
        services, but at the same time explained that there are alternatives to SIM-based
        SEs in order to enter the market for the provision of mobile payment services.88
(100) Second, the Notifying Parties do not have the ability to technically or
        commercially foreclose the use of alternative SE solutions to the JV’s
        competitors. Indeed, the results of the market investigation univocally indicated
        that MNOs do not have the technical ability to disable or degrade the performance
85  See Form CO, Annex 31, paragraph 120.
86  See Form CO, Annex 31, paragraph 129.
87 See Form CO, Annex 31, paragraphs 120-122. The only element for which the JV will rely on the SIM
    card to store confidential information is for mobile signature services which need to be used for high
    value payments. For a discussion and analysis in potential foreclosure to these services, please refer to
    Section 4.2.2.
88 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 24.
                                                        19

        of alternative SE solutions, in particular embedded SEs.89 Likewise, the results of
        the market investigation suggest that, despite their large market share in the
        market for the provision of mobile telecommunications services (see Table 3
        below) as well as in the market for the retail sale of mobile communications
        devices (see Table 4 below), the Lithuanian MNOs have not succeeded in
        obtaining that OEMs design and manufacture specific version of handsets to be
        shipped to Lithuania (for instance without embedded SE) or disable SE embedded
        in the hardware of mobile handsets.90
(101) Finally, the Commission considers that, even if the Notifying Parties were to have
        ability and incentive to foreclose competing providers of mobile payment services
        in Lithuania through foreclosure strategies related to secure storage, their conduct
        is unlikely to have an overall negative impact on competition in the market for the
        provision of mobile payment services in Lithuania. Indeed, any such attempt
        could be circumvented by the JV’s rivals by opting to alternative solutions, such
        as embedded SEs, including, for example by entering in partnerships with OEMs.
(102) In any event, the Commission notes that for any foreclosure strategy to be
        effective it would have to be the result of a joint parallel behaviour of the
        Notifying Parties in the market for the provision of secure storage for mobile
        payment services where the Notifying Parties are gatekeepers and where their
        activities remain independent, and not of the behaviour of the JV. It would suffice
        for one of the Notifying Parties to defect from such joint parallel foreclosure
        strategy to severely limit the effectiveness of foreclosure as competitors of the JV
        would not be completely foreclosed anymore. As explained in Section 4.3.2, on
        the basis of the overall evidence in the file, the Commission considers that the
        Transaction is unlikely to give rise to coordination of the Notifying Parties'
        competitive behaviour in the market for secure storage for mobile payment
        services.
(103) In conclusion, the Commission notes that the majority of respondents to the
        market investigation, including the majority of actual and potential competitors of
        the JV, have indicated that the Transaction is going to have a positive or neutral
        effect on the markets for the provision of mobile payment services in Lithuania
        and on their company.91
(104) In light of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
        raise serious doubts with regard to its compatibility with the internal market as a
        result of foreclosure effects with respect to the provision of secure storage to the
        detriment of alternative providers of mobile payment services.
89 See replies to questionnaire Q2 of 16 June 2017 to OEM and OS providers, question 7.
90 Due to the limited effectiveness of a foreclosure strategy based on the denying of access to the SIM
   based SE the Commission considers that it appears unlikely that the Notifying Parties would have an
   incentive to engage in foreclosure relating to secure storage services. See replies to questionnaire Q2
   of 16 June 2017 to OEM and OS providers, question 9
91 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, questions 39 to 42. See also
   replies to questionnaire Q2 of 16 June 2017 to OS providers and handset manufacturers, questions 10
   to 12.
                                                       20


4.2.2.3. Commission's assessment
(108) The Commission considers that it is unlikely that the Notifying Parties would
        have the ability and the incentive to foreclose competing providers of mobile
        payment service using foreclosure strategies related to mobile authentication and
        signature services. The Commission concludes that this would be unlikely even if
        one were to consider the narrowest market including only the mobile signature
        services offered by the Notifying Parties. The reasons for this conclusion are as
        follows.
(109) First, on the basis of the information provided by the Notifying Parties, it appears
        that they cannot technically block the functioning of the mobile signature only for
        the use of specific services. Rather, the mobile signature is either "on" or "off" in
        its entirety. Therefore, should the Notifying Parties block the mobile signature for
        certain end users, they would jeopardise the viability of the JV itself, as it is
        envisaged that mobile signature services which will be used as a form of payment
        authentication for high value payments will form an integral part of the mobile
        payment system offered by the JV95 The same argument would apply if the
        Notifying Parties were to stop registering end-users.
(110) Second, the Notifying Parties do not have a direct commercial relationship with
        trusting parties or service providers of mobile authentication and signature
        services, that is to say those that accept mobile signature in the context of their
        activities (e.g. banks which accept the mobile signature of their customers to
        access online banking facilities and authorise payment transactions). This implies
        that the Notifying Parties could not exert commercial pressure on those trusting
        parties in order to prevent a competing provider of mobile payment services from
        using the mobile signature for authentication of its customers and authorisation of
        their mobile payments. A commercial relationship only exists between the
        Notifying Parties and their mobile subscribers who conclude respective contracts
        with the MNOs for the provision of mobile signature services.
(111) A fortiori, the Commission considers that the Notifying Parties would not have
        the ability and the incentive to foreclose competing providers of mobile payment
        service through foreclosure strategies related to mobile authentication and
        signature services under a broader market definition. The results of the market
        investigation highlight that the mobile authentication and signature services
        provided by the Notifying Parties are not seen as an essential input for the
        provision of mobile payment services. Notably, the majority of respondents stated
        that there are alternatives in the market for mobile authentication and signature
        services. Such alternatives include biometrics solutions such as fingerprint or iris
        scanning, passcode or PIN code at the point of sale.96
(112) A minority of respondents stated that while alternatives exist they may not be as
        effective as the mobile signature services provided by the Notifying Parties. In
        this regard the Commission notes that today mobile payment services are already
        offered using those alternatives and that the use of mobile signature services is
        currently limited. Moreover, the Notifying Parties themselves do not plan that the
95  Form CO, paragraphs 144-150. Mobile signature services will be used as additional payment
    authentication for payments from EUR 150 onwards.
96 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, question 25.
                                                       22

        JV will rely on their mobile signature services for low value transactions. Strong
        customer authentication on the basis of mobile signature services will only be
        used by the JV for transactions that have a value of EUR 150 or higher, therefore
        only for a subset of the JV's mobile payment transactions.
(113) Lastly, the Commission considers that, even if the Notifying Parties were to have
        the ability and the incentive to foreclose competing providers of mobile payment
        services in Lithuania through foreclosure strategies related to mobile
        authentication and signature services, the impact of any such foreclosure strategy
        would be very limited. Indeed, under the broader market definition, the JV's rivals
        would have several alternatives to the mobile authentication and signature
        services provided by the Notifying Parties. Under the narrowest market definition,
        limited to mobile signature services, the effectiveness of any foreclosure strategy
        would be restricted by the fact that the mobile signature services offered by the
        MNOs would only be necessary, if at all, for certain mobile payment transactions,
        i.e. high value payments, which implies that such foreclosure would only be
        partial.97
(114) In any event, the Commission notes that for any foreclosure strategy to be
        effective it would have to be the result of a joint parallel behaviour of the
        Notifying Parties in the market for the provision of mobile authentication and
        signature services where their activities remain independent and not of the
        behaviour of the JV. It would suffice for one of the Notifying Parties to defect
        from such joint parallel foreclosure strategy to severely limit the effectiveness of
        foreclosure as competitors of the JV would not be completely foreclosed
        anymore. As explained in Section 4.3.2, on the basis of the overall evidence in the
        file, the Commission consider that the Transaction is unlikely to give rise to
        coordination of the Notifying Parties' competitive behaviour in the market for
        mobile authentication and signature services.
(115) Finally, the Commission notes that the majority of respondents to the market
        investigation, including the majority of actual and potential competitors of the JV,
        have indicated that the Transaction is going to have a positive or neutral effect on
        the markets for the provision of mobile payment services in Lithuania and on
        their company. Moreover, none of those few actual and potential competitors of
        the JV, which indicated that the Transaction would have a negative impact on the
        markets and on their company, have raised issues with respect to the provision of
        mobile authentication and signature services.98
(116) In light of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
        raise serious doubts with regard to its compatibility with the internal market as a
        result of foreclosure effects with respect to the provision of mobile authentication
        and signature services to the detriment of alternative providers of mobile payment
        services.
97 See paragraph (112) in relation to the Notifying Parties' plans for use of mobile signatures by the JV.
98 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, questions 39 to 42. See also
   replies to questionnaire Q2 of 16 June 2017 to OS providers and handset manufacturers, questions 10
   to 12.
                                                       23

4.2.3. Input foreclosure concerns related to colocation services
4.2.3.1. Market shares
                                              24

(117) Table 2 below shows market shares by value of Telia and its main competitors in
      the market for the provision of colocation services in the Vilnius metropolitan
      area in 2016.
                                           25


4.2.3.3. Commission's assessment
(120) The Commission considers that post-Transaction Telia would not have the ability
         and the incentives to foreclose competing providers of mobile payment services,
         by refusing, or making more onerous the terms for, access to its data centres for
         the following reasons.
(121) First, the Commission notes that while Telia would have the ability to foreclose
         access to its own colocation services, such a foreclosure strategy would only
         affect [30-40]% of the colocation market. Foreclosed customers could therefore
         resort to other alternative suppliers that are present in the market, which have
         sufficient spare capacity. One of those alternative colocation service providers is
         DLC, the current market leader with a market share of [40-50]%. Foreclosure
         would therefore remain partial which would in turn severely limit the
         effectiveness of such a strategy.
(122) Second, a big asymmetry in Telia's current revenues on colocation services and
         Telia's expected revenues from the provision of mobile payment services exists.
         Notably, the revenues achieved by Telia in 2016 from the provision of colocation
         services alone […] the revenues that all MNOs are estimated to receive, […]. By
         preventing access to its colocation services in order to foreclose a customer on the
         market for mobile payment services, Telia would forego more revenues on the
         colocation market than it could expect to gain on the mobile payment market.
         Such a foreclosure strategy would therefore not be profitable.100 Moreover, the
         gains that Telia would achieve from the sales of mobile payment services by the
         JV are highly uncertain as they depend on the future expected uptake and usage of
         mobile payment services of the JV by Telia's mobile telecommunications
         subscribers compared to the losses that would take the form of foregone profits in
         colocation services. 101
(123) Third, Telia has recently made investments to increase the capacity of its data
         centres which it is unlikely to recoup if it were to stop offering access or offering
         disadvantageous access conditions to new potential customers, including actual or
         potential providers of mobile payment services.
(124) Finally, the Commission considers that, even if Telia were to have the ability and
         the incentive to foreclose competing providers of mobile payment services, such
         conduct is unlikely to have an overall negative impact on competition in the
         market for the provision of mobile payment services in Lithuania.
100 In 2016 […]% of Telia's colocation customers by revenues were also active in the provision of mobile
    payment services. If Telia were to engage in a foreclosure strategy to favour the JV, it would have to
    forego all of these revenues.
101 The Commission also notes that if Telia were to refuse access or degrade the access terms of these
    customers, such customers are likely to switch to alternative providers not only for colocation services,
    but potentially also for other services, so that Telia's losses from the foreclosure strategy would be
    greater than the revenues from the colocation business. Indeed, […] of Telia's colocation customers
    which are also active in the provision of mobile payment services (accounting, as mentioned, to […] of
    Telia's colocation business by revenues) do not only purchase colocation but also other services, and
    the revenues gained by Telia from the sale of all of these services are […] than the revenues stemming
    from the sale of colocation services.
                                                         27


4.2.4.2. Notifying Parties' view
(130) The Notifying Parties submit that they would neither have the ability nor the
         incentive to foreclose the JV's rivals by blocking competing mobile payment
         services in Lithuania from using mobile broadband services, so that relevant apps
         could not be downloaded, installed and updated or mobile payment services could
         not properly function on a mobile device. Among other arguments, in particular,
         they submit that they do not have the technical ability to prevent the downloading
         of the rival mobile payment applications without blocking service user's access to
         the entire online application store. Moreover, the Notifying Parties submit that
         any such behaviour would be prohibited by the Net Neutrality Regulation.103
4.2.4.3. Commission's assessment
(131) In view of the applicable legislation and in line with its precedents, 104 the
         Commission considers that post-Transaction the Notifying Parties would not have
         the ability to foreclose competing providers of mobile payment services, by
         blocking such services from using mobile broadband services. Indeed, it is not
         possible for MNOs to block a consumer broadband connection for specific uses
         (without prejudicing also the JV mobile payment services). Such behaviour would
         be in violation of Article 3(3), third paragraph, of the Net Neutrality Regulation
         pursuant to which "providers of internet access services shall not engage in
         traffic management measures going beyond those set out in the second
         subparagraph, and in particular shall not block, slow down, alter, restrict,
         interfere with, degrade or discriminate between specific content, applications or
         services, or specific categories thereof". The same article of the Net Neutrality
         Regulation envisages exceptions to this rule, but none of these exceptions would
         be applicable to the foreclosure strategy at stake.
(132) In any event, the Commission notes that for any foreclosure strategy to be
         effective it would have to be the result of a joint parallel behaviour of the
         Notifying Parties in the market for the provision of retail mobile
         telecommunications services in Lithuania where their activities remain
         independent, and not of the behaviour of the JV. It would suffice for one of the
         Notifying Parties to defect from such joint parallel foreclosure strategy to
         severely limit the effectiveness of foreclosure as competitors of the JV would not
         be completely foreclosed anymore. As explained in Section 4.3.2, on the basis of
         the overall evidence in the file, the Commission consider that the Transaction is
         unlikely to give rise to coordination of the Notifying Parties' competitive
         behaviour in the market for the provision of retail mobile telecommunications
         services in Lithuania.
(133) Finally, the Commission notes that the majority of respondents to the market
         investigation, including the majority of actual and potential competitors of the JV,
         have indicated that the Transaction is going to have a positive or neutral effect on
103 Regulation (EU) 2015/2120 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015
    laying down measures concerning open internet access and amending Directive 2002/22/EC on
    universal service and users’ rights relating to electronic communications networks and services and
    Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 on roaming on public mobile communications networks within the
    Union (the 'Net Neutrality Regulation'), OJ L 310, 26.11.2015, p. 1–18.
104 See the 'Net Neutrality Regulation' and the UK MCommerce decision, recitals 294-313.
                                                        29


(137) The Notifying Parties were not able to provide precise shares for all possible
         product and geographic sub-segmentation, but submitted that their shares under
         these possible market definitions would not differ from those presented in the
         above table.
4.2.5.2. Notifying Parties' view
(138) The Notifying Parties state that they would not have the ability and the incentive
         to foreclose rivals by pressuring OEMs or operating system ('OS') providers not
         to install or to block the pre-installed embedded SEs. The reasons for this are in
         particular as follows: (i) the Lithuanian market is small and mobile devices are
         typically not customised for Lithuanian consumers; (ii) the Notifying Parties have
         limited bargaining power vis-à-vis OEMs and OS providers and (iii) OEMs such
         as Apple do not provide customised mobile devices at all.
(139) The Notifying Parties also assert that even in a scenario where they had such
         bargaining power, implementing commercial foreclosure by means of pressuring
         OEMs and OS providers not to pre-install or to block the pre-installed SEs, such a
         strategy would be largely ineffective. Among other things, such a strategy would
         only lead to partial foreclosure as mobile handsets are also sold by independent
         retail providers. Furthermore, OS providers and OEMs could engage in effective
         counterstrategies and also financial institutions could set up rival mobile payment
         solutions by partnering with 'over-the-top' providers, for instance.106
4.2.5.3. Commission's assessment
(140) The Commission considers that post-Transaction the Notifying Parties would not
         have the ability and the incentive to foreclose competing providers of mobile
         payment services in Lithuania by leveraging their market position in the retail sale
         of mobile communication devices and in particular smartphone for the following
         reasons. Indeed, the Notifying Parties do not have the ability to technically or
         commercially foreclose the use of alternative mobile payment services on the
         mobile devices they sell. In this regard, the majority of respondents to the market
         investigation stated that MNOs would not have the technical ability to pre-install
         the JV mobile payment apps on mobile devices.107 Likewise, based on the results
         of the market investigation the Commission considers that, despite their large
         share in the retail sale of smartphones, the Lithuanian MNOs have not succeeded
         in obtaining from OEMs and OS providers the pre-installation of specific mobile
         apps on the devices shipped to Lithuania.108
(141) Finally, the Commission considers that, even if the Notifying Parties were to have
         the ability and the incentive to foreclose competing providers of mobile payment
         services in Lithuania by leveraging their market position in the retail sale of
106 See Form CO, Annex 31, paragraphs 149-150.
107 See replies to questionnaire Q2 of 16 June 2017 to OEM and OS providers, question 8.
108 See replies to questionnaire Q2 of 16 June 2017 to OEM and OS providers, question 9 and Notifying
    Parties' reply to the Commission's Request for Information of 10 July 2017, question 4. Only one of
    the Notifying Parties (Tele2) has in one instance requested and succeeded to obtain from an OEM the
    pre-installation of a specific app for Lithuania. The other two Notifying Parties have never requested
    and succeeded to obtain such pre-installation. Due to the limited effectiveness of any foreclosure
    strategy, the Commission considers that it appears unlikely that the Notifying Parties would have an
    incentive to engage in foreclosure leveraging their market position in the retail sale of mobile devices.
                                                         31

         mobile communications devices in Lithuania, such a strategy is unlikely to have
         an overall negative impact on competition in the market for the provision of
         mobile payment services in Lithuania.
(142) First, over 40% of the sales of smartphones by value, and 30% of such sales by
         volume, are concluded by retailers which are independent from the Notifying
         Parties, so that the competitors of the JV could still sell to a significant share of
         customers. Such a foreclosure strategy would therefore be limited in effect.
(143) In addition, the Commission notes that for any foreclosure strategy to be effective
         it would have to be the result of a joint parallel behaviour of the Notifying Parties,
         and not of the behaviour of the JV, in the market for the retail sale of mobile
         communications devices in Lithuania where their activities remain independent. It
         would suffice for one of the Notifying Parties to defect from such joint parallel
         foreclosure strategy to severely limit the effectiveness of foreclosure as
         competitors of the JV would not be completely foreclosed anymore. As explained
         in Section 4.3.2, on the basis of the overall evidence in the file, the Commission
         consider that the Transaction is unlikely to give rise to coordination of the
         Notifying Parties' competitive behaviour in the market for the retail sale of mobile
         communications devices in Lithuania.
(144) Lastly, the Commission notes that the majority of respondents to the market
         investigation, including the majority of actual and potential competitors of the JV,
         have indicated that the Transaction is going to have a positive or neutral effect on
         the markets for the provision of mobile payment services in Lithuania and on
         their company.109
(145) In light of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
         raise serious doubts with regard to its compatibility with the internal market as a
         result of foreclosure effects with respect to the retail sale of mobile
         communications devices in Lithuania to the detriment of alternative providers of
         mobile payment services.
  4.3. Cooperative effects of a joint venture
(146) After the Transaction, the Notifying Parties will retain their respective activities
         in the supply of payment intermediation services in Lithuania. Depending on the
         exact boundaries of the relevant product market,110 these activities can be
         regarded either as part of the same market or as part of a neighbouring market
         closely related to the market for the provision of mobile payment services in
         Lithuania, in which the JV will operate.
(147) Moreover, after the Transaction, the Notifying Parties will retain their activities in
         the supply of secure storage, mobile authentication and signature services, retail
         mobile telecommunications services, retail mobile communication devices and
         retail fixed Internet access services in Lithuania.111 Each of these activities could
109 See replies to questionnaire Q1 of 16 June 2017 to financial players, questions 39 to 42. See also
    replies to questionnaire Q2 of 16 June 2017 to OS providers and handset manufacturers, questions 10
    to 12.
110 See Section 3.2.1 above.
111 Only two of the Notifying Parties, Telia and Bite, will be active in the retail supply of fixed Internet
    access services in Lithuania, as Tele2 does not operate on that market.
                                                        32

        potentially be regarded as either upstream of, or neighbouring and closely related
        to, the market for the retail provision of mobile payment services in Lithuania, in
        which the JV will operate.
(148) In accordance with Articles 2(4) and 2(5) of the Merger Regulation, the
        Commission has assessed whether the Transaction would create scope for
        coordination among the Notifying Parties in the markets mentioned in paragraphs
        (146) and (147) above, which is to be appraised under Article 101 TFEU. A
        restriction of competition under Article 101(1) TFEU is established when the
        coordination of the parent companies' competitive behaviour is likely and
        appreciable and results from the creation of the joint venture, be it as its object or
        effect.
4.3.1. Notifying Parties' view
(149) The Notifying Parties submit that the Transaction will not lead to anticompetitive
        coordination within the meaning of Article 101(1) TFEU. In particular, according
        to the Notifying Parties, post-Transaction, each of them will continue to decide on
        its own competitive strategy and actions individually, and competitively sensitive
        commercial information about their respective businesses will not be known or
        accessible to the other Notifying Parties or to the JV.
(150) In this respect, the Notifying Parties point out that they have entered into an
        agreement with each other to prevent any exchange of confidential information
        among them via the JV (the 'Confidentiality Agreement').112 In particular,
        according to the Notifying Parties, the Confidentiality Agreement provides that
        cooperation among them will be exclusively limited to the JV's activities and that
        the Notifying Parties will not deal with any issues, disclose any information
        (either directly or via the JV's management bodies or employees) or adopt any
        decisions not directly related to the JV's activities. Moreover, the Notifying
        Parties submit that the Confidentiality Agreement also establishes additional rules
        to ensure that any confidential information concerning one of the Notifying
        Parties that may potentially be disclosed to the JV for the purposes of its activities
        be appropriately protected and not forwarded to the two other Notifying Parties.
(151) Finally, with specific regard to the market for the supply of retail mobile
        telecommunications services in Lithuania, the Notifying Parties argue that, if
        anything, the Transaction may encourage more competition among the Notifying
        Parties in that market. This is because, given the revenue sharing model in place
        between them and the JV,113 the more mobile subscribers each of the Notifying
        Parties has, the larger revenues it may be able to generate from the JV's mobile
        payment services activities.
4.3.2. Commission's assessment
(152) The Commission takes the view that the Transaction is unlikely to give rise to
        coordination of the Notifying Parties' competitive behaviour on any of the
112 Agreement on the use of information between the shareholders, management bodies and employees of
    UAB Mobilus mokejimai, dated 18 April 2017.
113 See footnote 6 above.
                                                     33

         markets mentioned in paragraphs (146)-(147). No evidence in the Commission's
         file pointed to any risk in this regard.
(153) As explained in paragraph (150) above, the Confidentiality Agreement entered
         into by the Notifying Parties lays down a number of measures aimed at ensuring
         that commercially sensitive information concerning their respective activities will
         not be exchanged among them via the JV.
(154) Moreover, the activities of the JV are expected to be relatively limited in terms of
         value compared to the Notifying Parties' respective activities in their core markets
         in Lithuania, particularly in the supply of retail mobile telecommunications
         services, retail mobile communication devices and retail fixed Internet access
         services.114 As a result, the Transaction in itself is unlikely to create a sufficiently
         strong incentive for the Notifying Parties to coordinate their competitive
         behaviour in the markets concerned.
(155) Finally, as regards the Notifying Parties' activities in the supply of payment
         intermediation services in Lithuania (which are expected to be less significant in
         economic terms than the JV's mobile payment activities), their combined market
         position within the overall retail provision of (remote) payment services in
         Lithuania is negligible.115 As a consequence, any potential coordination between
         the Notifying Parties in this area would be unlikely to be appreciable.
(156) Accordingly, the Commission concludes that the Transaction is unlikely to have
         as its object or effect the coordination of the Notifying Parties' competitive
         behaviour in a manner contrary to Article 101 TFEU.
5.       CONCLUSION
(157) For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
         operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the EEA
         Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
         Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                                 For the Commission
                                                                 (Signed)
                                                                 Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                                 Member of the Commission
114 According to estimates provided by the Notifying Parties, the respective gross profits from their
    activities in those core markets will be around fifty times higher than the expected profits of the JV in
    2020, after its initial ramping-up period.
115 See Notifying Parties' reply to the Commission's Request for Information of 10 July 2017, question 2.
    According to the Notifying Parties, the respective activities in payments intermediation services of
    each of them are not likely to account for more than 1% of the overall market for the retail provision of
    (remote) payment services and, in any event, their combined market shares would be well below 10%.
                                                         34
