                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
 In the published version of this decision, some                Brussels, 24.3.2017
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article               C(2017) 2105 final
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a                    PUBLIC VERSION
 general description.
                                                                To the notifying parties
Subject:           M.8359 - Amundi / Credit Agricole / Pioneer Investments
                   Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council
                   Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the
                   European Economic Area2
Dear Sir/Madam,
(1)     On 20 February 2017 the European Commission received notification of a
        proposed concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which
        Amundi S.A. (Amundi), subsidiary of Crédit Agricole S.A. (France) acquires
        within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation sole control of
        Pioneer Global Asset Management S.p.A. ("Pioneer"), the asset management
        business of UniCredit S.p.A (Italy) by way of purchase of shares ("the
        Transaction").3 Amundi and Pioneer are collectively referred to as "the Parties".
1       OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty
        on the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
        replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology
        of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2       OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
3       Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 62, 25.2.2017, p. 10.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

 I.  THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
(2)  Crédit Agricole is a publicly-traded French banking group active globally in retail
     banking, insurance, real estate and financial services.
(3)  Amundi is a subsidiary of Crédit Agricole specialising in asset management for
     both institutional and retail clients, covering all asset classes. It is active
     worldwide.
(4)  Pioneer is a subsidiary of Italian banking group UniCredit specialised in asset
     management, active worldwide.
(5)  On 11 December 2016, the Parties concluded a stock purchase agreement pursuant
     to which Amundi acquires sole control over Pioneer's subsidiaries in a number of
     countries, i.e. Austria, the Czech Republic, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg
     and the United States. The Pioneer subsidiaries in Australia, Hungary, India,
     Romania, Switzerland and Taiwan will also be part of the Transaction provided
     that the Parties receive the relevant regulatory approval in time for closing.
     Pioneer's subsidiaries in Bermudas, Ireland, Israel and the US Alternative Pioneer
     Investments (New York) Ltd are not included in the perimeter of the Transaction.
(6)  On 8 december 2016 UniCredit signed a separate share purchase agreement with
     Powszechny Zaklad Ubezpieczen SA ("PZU Group") and the Polish Development
     Fund S.A. ("PFR") for the sale of Pioneer's Polish subsidiaries; this transaction is
     being reviewed by the Polish authorities. Should PZU Group and PFR fail to
     receive the necessary regulatory approvals in Poland, the Polish subsidiaries of
     Pioneer would also be included in the Transaction. The assessment of the impact of
     the Transaction below presumes the largest possible scope of the Transaction, so
     that the conditionality on the exact perimeter of the Transaction would not impact
     the merger review.
(7)  In the light of the above, the Transaction constitutes a concentration within the
     meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
    The distribution agreements
(8)  In Italy, Austria and Germany Amundi has entered into distribution agreements
     with UniCredit for the distribution of Pioneer’s retail funds in these three Member
     States. In addition, Amundi and UniCredit have agreed to maintain the existing
     distribution agreements entered into between UniCredit Bank Czech Republic and
     Slovakia, a.s. and Pioneer, dated 22 August 2016, for the distribution of Pioneer
     funds in the Czech Republic and Slovakia (all together, the “Distribution
     Agreements”).
(9)  Based on the Distribution Agreements post-Transaction UniCredit will continue to
     distribute Pioneer funds through its banking networks. Pursuant to the Distribution
     Agreements, Pioneer funds shall represent at least (i) […]% of the asset
     management funds distributed by UniCredit in Italy, (ii) […]% of the asset
     management funds distributed by UniCredit in Austria, (iii) […]% of the asset
     management funds distributed by UniCredit in Germany and (iv) […]% of the
     retail funds distributed by UniCredit in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, provided
     that Pioneer meets qualitative and performance criteria. The Distribution
     Agreements have been concluded for ten years.
                                                2

 (10) The Notifying Party does not seek the benefit of the Commission Notice on
      restrictions directly related and necessary to concentrations (the "Notice").4 In this
      context, the Commission notes that in any event the Distribution Agreements
      clearly fall outside the scope of the principles set out in the Notice and they cannot
      be considered part of the main object of the concentration, which is the acquisition
      of sole control by Amundi over Pioneer. As provided for in paragraph 7 of the
      Notice, the Distribution Agreements cannot be considered directly related and
      necessary to the implementation of the concentration and are therefore not covered
      by this Decision. Consequently, such Agreements remain subject to the assessment
      under Articles 101 and 102 TFEU without prejudice to their compatibility or
      otherwise with the said Articles.
 (11) Notwithstanding that the scope of the present Decision does not cover the
      Distribution Agreements these arrangements nonetheless are taken into
      consideration when assessing the competitive effects of the Transaction, in
      particular in the context of vertical links between asset management and the
      distribution of asset management products.
 II.  EU DIMENSION
 (12) The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate worldwide turnover of
      more than EUR 5 000 million5 (Crédit Agricole: EUR 90 495 million, Pioneer:
      EUR 2 313 million). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250
      million (Crédit Agricole: EUR […], Pioneer: […]). Not all undertakings concerned
      achieve more than two-thirds of its aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the
      same Member State.
 (13) The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension under Article 1(2) of the
      Merger Regulation.
III.  COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
 (14) The Transaction brings together the activities of Amundi and Pioneer, which are to
      a certain extent complementary in terms of geographic presence and product
      offering. Consequently, the Transaction results in horizontal overlaps between
      Amundi and Pioneer on the market for asset management and its segments in a
      number of countries, but leading to affected markets for asset management only in
      France and in the Czech Republic and for the distribution of asset management
      products in France. The Transaction also leads to an affected market for
      distribution of asset management products in France since Crédit Agricole is a
      provider of retail banking services and distributor of asset management products to
      retail clients.
 (15) In addition, the Transaction leads to vertical links leading to affected markets in
      France (i) between asset management for retail clients (upstream) and the
      distribution of asset management products for retail clients (downstream), (ii)
 4    OJ C 56, 5.3.2005 p. 24.
 5    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
      Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
                                                       3

     between asset management (downstream) and custody services (upstream) and (iii)
     between asset management (downstream) and fund administration services
     (upstream).
            A. Market definition
     Asset management
(16) Asset management concerns the creation, establishment and marketing of funds
     mainly to retail clients on an “off-the-shelf” basis and the provision of portfolio
     management services for institutional investors. A variety of assets are used as the
     basis of an investment, such as equity, fixed income, real estate, or money market
     instruments.
(17) In previous cases the Commission has considered a relevant product market for
     overall asset management. Further segmentation was also considered. In particular,
     the Commission examined the possible distinction between a relevant product
     market for the creation and managing of mutual funds for retail clients on the one
     hand, and the tailor-made funds for corporate and institutional customers, on the
     other hand.6 Institutional clients are entities such as pension funds, banks or
     insurance companies that purchase asset management product and services directly
     from asset management companies rather than via a non-specialised intermediary
     such as a retail bank7. Conversely, retail clients are provided with asset
     management products and services through general corporate banking networks
     acting as distributors.8
(18) Within the asset management for institutional clients the Commission considered
     existence of separate market for active asset management and passive market
     management.9 Active asset management consists of strategies applied by the
     investment manager with the goal of outperforming a benchmark, for instance an
     index, while passive strategies merely seek to replicate the performance of an
     index.
(19) As regards retail customers, the Commission considered a segmentation between
     open and closed retail funds.10 Closed funds are funds which are tailor-made for a
     small group of investors and not distributed through retail channels. Such funds are
     not open to the subscription of new capital by persons unknown to the nominative
     shareholders. On the other hand, open funds do not have any restrictions on the
     number of investors.
6     M.6812, SFPI / Dexia, Commission decision of February 2, 2013, para. 31; M.3894, UniCredito /
      HVB, paras. 35-36; M.4844, Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, paras. 67-70; M.5580, Blackrock /
      Barclays GIH, paras. 8-13.
7     M. 5728, Credit Agricole/ Societe Generale Asset Management, para 33.
8     M.5728 Credit Agricole/ Societe Generale Asset Management, para 35.
9     M.5580, BlackRock/Barclays GIH, para. 10; M.5728, Crédit Agricole /Société Générale Asset
      Management, para. 35-39.
10    M.5728, Crédit Agricole / Société Générale Asset Management, paras. 68-69.
                                                     4

(20) In previous cases the Commission considered also the existence of a separate
     segment for mutual funds and, within the mutual funds, a separate market for
     money market funds. Money market funds were considered to constitute relatively
     short-term investment vehicles used by investors for optimizing working capital.11
(21) To conclude, in its previous decisions the Commission has left open the question
     whether the asset management market should be treated as one relevant market or
     should be segmented according to the above distinctions.
(22) The Notifying Party submits that there should be no segmentation of the overall
     market for asset management.
(23) The market investigation in the present case has largely confirmed the possibility
     of segmenting the market for asset management according to the above
     delineations.
(24) Some market participants suggested additional delineations. For example, one
     competitor suggested a distinction per type of asset under management: equities,
     bonds, alternative assets.12 Another competitor active in France explained that one
     could consider distinguishing so called Alternative investment funds (AIF)
     regulated by the AIF Directive13, and the so called Undertakings for Collective
     Investments in Transferable Securities (UCITS)14, which are regulated by the
     UCITS Directive.15 These were however isolated voices.16
(25) In general, the responses by the market participants confirm that it is possible to
     consider various segments within the asset management market, but it is also
     justified to look at the asset management as a whole. For example, one of the
     competitors explained that : "We consider that it make sense for institutional
     business to split between passive and active management. However (…) more and
     more UCITS funds are addressed to both institutional and retail clients. In addition
     most of the money market funds are mainly sold to institutional clients for treasury
     needs but retail clients are also able to invest.17
(26) Furthermore, as regards the supply side, although according to the Notifying Party's
     asset management providers tend to provide a full range of asset management
11    M. 3894 Unicredito/HVB paras. 35-36; M. 1453 –AXA/GRE; M. 4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets,
      para. 67, paras. 7 and 8.
12    Replies to question 4 of Questionnaire Q4 – Customers, France.
13    Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on Alternative
      Investment Fund Managers and amending Directives 2003/41/EC and 2009/65/EC and Regulations
      (EC) No 1060/2009 and (EU) No 1095/2010, OJ L 174, 1.7.2011, p. 1–73.
14    Replies to question 6 of Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France.
15    Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the
      coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for
      collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS), OJ L 302, 17.11.2009, p. 32–96.
16    See replies to question 4, Questionnaire Q4 – Customers, France.
17    See replies to question 6 of Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France.
                                                         5

     products and services, the market investigation results provide for a more nuanced
     view. While large asset managers tend to cover all main asset classes, there is a
     number of so called "boutique" suppliers, who tend to specialise in certain
     categories of products. 18
(27) In any event, for the purpose of the present case it can be left open whether the
     market for asset management constitutes one product market or whether each
     segment within the asset management category should be considered a distinct
     product market, since the transaction does not raise competition concerns under any
     plausible product market definition.
(28) As regards the geographic market definition, the Commission has previously
     considered the market for asset management products to be national or wider than
     national in scope.19 As regards the asset management for institutional clients, the
     Commission considered that the market may be wider than national in scope.20 In
     contrast, in relation to the asset management for retail clients, the Commission held
     that the geographic scope of the markets for open retail mutual funds as well as for
     money market funds should be considered national, due to the importance of
     distribution.21
(29) The market investigation results have to a large extent confirmed the past findings
     of the Commission. As explained by one of the competitors active in France "For
     main of the European countries, competition takes place more and more at a
     national level. However, part of this competition comes from cross-border players,
     sometimes coming from the US."22 Furthermore, in line with the past assessment of
     the Commission, another competitor active in France explained that the approach
     depends on whether the institutional or retail clients are concerned, which
     determines two different levels of competition.23 In general, the majority of
     competitors consider the asset management market for institutional clients to be
     EEA-wide or even global in scope, although some respondents consider that even
     for the institutional clients the asset management market is national.24
     Consequently, definite conclusions cannot be drawn but the overall review of the
     responses has provided support for the view that for retail clients the market is
     national due to the need for national distribution channel, while for the institutional
     clients the market may be wider.
(30) Furthermore, while the results of the marker investigation show that the general
     regulatory framework for asset management has been harmonised across the EU
18    Replies to question 7 of Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France.
19    M.6812, SFPI / Dexia, Commission decision of February 2, 2013, para. 32.
20    M.5728, Crédit Agricole / Société Générale Asset Management, para 41.
21    M.5728, Crédit Agricole / Société Générale Asset Management, para. 84.
22    Replies to question 8 of Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France.
23    Replies to question 8 of Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France and to question 7, questionnaire
      Q4 – Customers, France and to question 8 of Questionnaire Q2 – Competitors, the Czech Republic.
24    Replies to question 8 of Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France and replies to question 8 of
      Questionnaire Q2 Competitors, the Czech Republic.
                                                     6

     through the UCITS and AIF Directives, competitors indicated that in conformity
     with the EU legislation some rules remain national in particular the marketing rules
     for selling UCITS funds in host Member States. The rules and requirements
     relating to advertising and marketing documentation are not harmonised across the
     EU.25
(31) In any event, for the purpose of the present case it can be left open whether the
     market for asset management is national or supra-national in scope, since the
     Transaction does not raise competition concerns under any plausible geographic
     market definition.
     Distribution of asset management products
(32) The Notifying Party submits that retail funds are distributed either indirectly via the
     retail networks of banks, insurance companies, and brokerage houses, or directly
     via online channels. Like most of their main competitors in Europe, Amundi and
     Pioneer are vertically integrated and currently distribute a significant part of their
     funds via the retail networks of their respective banking groups: Amundi via Crédit
     Agricole and Pioneer via UniCredit. Therefore the Parties' activities overlap in the
     area of distribution of asset management products specifically via the retail
     networks of banks.
(33) In previous decisions26 the Commission considered a relevant market comprising
     all retail banking products as well as the possibility of segmenting retail banking
     market according to offered products (personal current accounts, savings accounts,
     consumer loans, mortgages and distribution of mutual funds).. In any event, the
     product market definition regarding the market for the distribution of the asset
     management products, and specifically regarding the retail banking can be left open
     since the Transaction does not raise any competitive concerns under any plausible
     market definition.
(34) In relation to the relevant geographic market, in previous decisions the
     Commission considered the market for retail banking to be national in scope,
     including for the distribution of mutual funds.27
     Custody services
(35) Custody services comprise the settlement, safekeeping and reporting of customers’
     (asset manager) marketable securities. More specifically, custody services include
     the following types of activity: safekeeping of the assets; presentation of securities
     for, and reception of securities from, clearing and settlement platforms; income and
     dividend processing; etc. The Commission has in the past considered whether a
     distinction should be made between global services (provided to investment
     institutions wherever they are localised) and domestic services (provided at a
     domestic level)28. Furthermore, within the market for domestic custody services the
25    Replies to question 9 of Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France.
26    M.4844, Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, para. 41; M.5384, BNP Paribas / Fortis, paras. 9-10.
27    M.4844, Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, para. 85, 139-142, 155-158; M.3894, UniCredito / HVB, para.
      41 and 54-57; M.6168 – RBI/EFG EUROBANK/JV, paras. 27-28.
28   M.1618, Bank of New York / Royal Bank of Scotland Trust Bank, para. 10.
                                                     7

      Commission considered distinguishing separate markets for (domestic) institutional
      custody services, sub-custody services and retail custody services.29
(36) The Notifying Party submits that segmenting the market for custody services is not
      necessary.
(37) As for the geographic definition, in its previous decisions, the Commission left
      open the exact definition of the geographic market.30 Nevertheless, the
      Commission noted that the market for global custody services could be considered
      worldwide or at least EEA-wide31, while domestic markets have been assessed at
      the national level.32
(38) In any event, for the purpose of this case the precise product and geographic market
      definition for custody services can be left open as the Transaction does not to raise
      competitive concerns irrespective of the precise product or geographic market
      definition.
      Fund administration
(39) Fund administration services include various services such as acting as trustee,
      depositary or depot bank of mutual funds, accounting services etc. In previous
      cases the Commission considered this activity to constitute one distinct product
      market.33 As regards the geographic scope, in its previous decisions, the
      Commission left open whether the geographic market should be considered
      national or wider in scope.34 The Notifying Party submits that the market is
      worldwide in scope. In any event, the precise product and geographic scope of the
      market for fund administration can be left open for the purpose of this case, as the
      Transaction does not raise competition concerns under any plausible product or
      geographic definition of the market for fund administration services.
   B. Competitive assessment
      1. Horizontal overlaps
(40) The Transaction leads to affected markets only in the area of asset management.
      Should the market for asset management was considered EEA-wide in geographic
      scope, the Transaction would not lead to any affected markets. Assuming that the
      competition takes place at the national level, the Transaction leads to a number of
      horizontally affected markets in France and in the Czech Republic. In France the
      Transaction leads to affected markets for overall asset management, asset
      management products for retail clients and its sub-segments and asset management
      products for institutional clients and in particular the market for active asset
29     M.5728, Crédit Agricole / Société Générale Asset Management, para. 114; M.4844, Fortis / ABN
       AMRO Assets, para. 69.
30     M.5728, Crédit Agricole / Société Générale Asset Management, para. 122
31     M.3781, Crédit Agricole / Caisse d' Epargne / JV, para. 17.
32     M.3781, Crédit Agricole / Caisse d' Epargne / JV, para. 20
33     M.3781, Crédit Agricole / Caisse d' Epargne / JV, para. 21.
34     M.5728, Crédit Agricole / Société Générale Asset Management, para. 124.
                                                       8


     competitive landscape. (…). As both actors are mainly operating on the European
     market, this would create a major player competing with BlackRock and JP
     Morgan on size."36
(44) The respondents to the Commission’s market investigation do not consider Amundi
     and Pioneer to be close competitors and they seem to specialise in different areas of
     asset management. Most respondents recognise that Amundi is a global player with
     a comprehensive offer and strong results, conversely, as regards Pioneer some
     respondents were not even in position to assess the performance and the
     positioning of Pioneer on the French market.37 As explained by one of competitors
     [Pionner has] "to the best of our knowledge, not a strong footprint in France".38
     Consequently a number of competitors was considered closer to Amundi than
     Pioneer in France, namely Natixis, BNP Paribas and Axa.39
(45) All the respondents to the market investigation consider the market for asset
     management in France to be competitive.40 As explained by one of the institutional
     customers in reply to the market investigation: "There is a large number of global
     asset managers offering services in France (over 150 of them are of a reasonable
     size). As an example, [a customer] works with more than 57 of them. During each
     request for proposal we conduct, [the customer] always have a sizeable number of
     candidates willing to offer their services (usually between 10 and 30 according to
     the asset class and the size of the mandate) and [the customer] also considers the
     prices offered to be fairly attractive." Or as explained by another respondent "With
     around 600 French Asset Managers, we can consider that French market is
     competitive".41 Consequently it is not expected that the Transaction could have any
     significant impact on the market for asset management or any of its segments in
     France.42
      Affected markets in the Czech Republic
(46) As regards the Czech Republic, Amundi has a market share of approximately [10-
     20]% in the market of asset management for retail clients and the sub-segment for
     open retail funds, while the market share of Pioneer amounts to [5-10]%. The
     cumulated market shares of the Parties therefore just reach [20-30]%, and the
     Parties will continue to face significant competitors, including the two market
     leaders Ceska sporitelna (CS) and the CSOB Group. As regards the narrower sub-
36    Replies to question 19, Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France.
37    Replies to questions 12, 13 Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France.
38    Replies to question 15, Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France.
39    Replies to question 14, Questionnaire Q1- Competitors, France and to question 6, Questionnaire Q4
      – Customers, France. At the European level it is considered that close competitors of Amundi are
      for example BlackRock, Allianz, Vanguard, JP Morgan etc.
40    Replies to question 16, Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France and to question 15, Questionnaire
      Q4 – Customers, France.
41    Replies to question 15, Questionnaire Q4 – Customers, France.
42    Replies to question 19, Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France and question 16 Questionnaire Q4,
      Customers, France.
                                                      10

      segment for money market, the increment is negligible as Pioneer holds a [0-5]%
      market share, with AuM of less than €[0.5 million], with the resulting delta HHI
      will below 10. In any event, money market funds are almost non-existent in Czech
      Republic and Amundi itself has very limited assets under management in this
      regard (less than €[50-100] million, compared to over [>1 billion] in the market for
      open retail mutual funds), so that its market share of [40-50]% cannot be
      considered as raising competition concerns.
(47) According to the replies to the market investigation Amundi and Pioneer are not
      considered close competitors in the Czech Republic. None of them is actually
      considered to be among the top five asset managers in the Czech Republic.43
      Among the most important market players, pointed out by the competitors44 and
      distributors45 in the Czech Republic are Generali, CS/Erste, CSOB/KBC and
      KB/Societe.
(48) In general, all market respondents say that the asset management market in all
      segments in the Czech Republic is competitive and they do not expect that the
      Transaction could have major impact on the market for asset management in the
      Czech Republic. 46
(49) In view of the above assessment, the Commission considers that the Transaction
      does not raise any competition concerns in the market for asset management or any
      of its segments.
      2.Vertical links
(50) The Transaction will lead to vertical links
             a. between asset management activity (by Amundi and Pioneer, upstream)
                  and asset management distribution by Crédit Agricole (downstream),
             b. between asset management activity by Amundi and Pioneer (downstream)
                  and custody and fund administration services provided by a subsidiary of
                  Crédit Agricole, CACEIS, (upstream activity).
(51) The market shares of the Parties will remain below 30% both upstream and
      downstream in all Member States and in potential market segments, except in
      France.
    a. Relationship between asset management activity (by Amundi and Pioneer,
    upstream) and mutual funds distribution by Crédit Agricole (downstream)
(52) On the downstream market for mutual funds distribution Crédit Agricole has a
      market share of approximately [10-20]%, while the combined market share on the
      upstream market, as indicated in Table 1 above, at maximum amounts to [20-30]%
43     Replies to questions 11, 12, 13 Questionnaire Q2 – Competitors, the Czech Republic.
44     Replies to question 10, Questionnaire Q2 – Competitors, the Czech Republic.
45     Replies to question 10, Questionnaire Q5 – Distributors, the Czech Republic.
46     Replies to question 16, Questionnaire Q6 – Customers, the Czech Republic.
                                                       11

      with virtually no change brought by the Transaction. The market investigation
      confirmed that the Transaction will not lead to any input or customer foreclosure,
      as there are numerous alternative suppliers both on the upstream and the
      downstream market. Most importantly the Transaction does not bring any
      significant change to the current situation since increments deriving from the
      Transaction are negligible.
    b. Relationship between asset management activity by Amundi and Pioneer
    (downstream) and custody and fund administration services provided by a subsidiary
    of Crédit Agricole, CACEIS, (upstream activity)
(53) CACEIS holds respectively a [30-40]% market share in custody services and [40-
      50]% market share in fund administration services. As regards input foreclosure,
      the parties submit that CACEIS is already vertically integrated and has never
      refused to provide custody services to customers other than Amundi. As explained
      in recitals (42) to (45) the Transaction brings hardly any difference in France on the
      asset management market, so it seems unlikely that CACEIS behaviour would
      change because of the Transaction. Also, significant market shares are held several
      strong competitors on the market for custody services and for fund administration
      in France and consequently, asset managers competing with Amundi/Pioneer will
      remain able to reply on a significant number of options for custody services and
      fund administration. In this regard, the incentives to adopt input foreclosure
      strategies seem low since there is possibility of migration of customers to other
      providers.
(54) The market investigation responses did not reveal any concerns that the
      Transaction could change the current behaviour of the merged entity and Crédit
      Agricole in particular. CACEIS is identified by the competitors as one of the main
      providers of custody and fund administration services in France together with BAN
      Paribas, Société Générale and Crédit Mutuel.47 Nevertheless, none of the
      respondents to the market investigation considers that the Transaction could
      incentivise the merged entity to pursue the foreclosure strategy and limit the access
      of asset managers in France to custody and fund administration services.48
(55) In addition, as regards customer foreclosure, given the minimal market share
      brought by Pioneer in France, even if Pioneer were to stop using providers of
      custody service or fund administration other than CACEIS, this could be hardly
      noticed by these suppliers.
(56) Therefore, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not lead to any
      competition concerns in the markets for the distribution of asset management
      products, custody services or fund administration services.
47     Replies to question 17, Questionnaire Q1, France.
48     Replies to question 18, Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, France.
                                                       12

IV.   CONCLUSION
 (57) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
      notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with the
      EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of the
      Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                      For the Commission
                                                      (Signed)
                                                      Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                      Member of the Commission
                                               13
