                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
 In the published version of this decision, some                Brussels, 14.9.2017
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article               C(2017) 6281 final
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information
                                                                         PUBLIC VERSION
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
 general description.
                                                                To the notifying parties:
Subject:             Case M.8414 – DNB / Nordea / Luminor Group
                     Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council
                     Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the
                     European Economic Area2
Dear Sir or Madam,
(1)       On 9 August 2017, the European Commission received a notification of a
          proposed concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No
          139/20043 by which DNB Bank ASA (“DNB”, Norway) and Nordea Bank AB
          (publ) (“Nordea”, Sweden) (together “the Notifying Parties”) join their banking
          operations in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania (together also referred to as "Baltic
          countries" or "Baltics") and create a new bank, called Luminor Group AB
          (“Luminor”), which will be jointly controlled by DNB and Nordea ("the
          Transaction").
1.     THE PARTIES
(2)       DNB is a Norwegian based bank, offering a full range of financial services,
          including loans, savings, advisory services, insurance and pension products for
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty
          on the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
          replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The
          terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2         OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
3         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the “Merger Regulation”).
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

     retail and corporate customers, mainly in Norway and also in Estonia, Latvia and
     Lithuania and other Baltic Sea countries.
(3)  Nordea is a Swedish based bank, offering a full range of financial services,
     including retail and corporate banking, investment banking, capital markets
     services, asset management and insurance; primarily in the Nordics and the Baltic
     Sea countries.
(4)  Luminor, the newly-created joint venture, is to be active in the provision of
     financial services, including retail and corporate banking in Estonia, Latvia and
     Lithuania.
2.  THE OPERATION
(5)  The transaction agreements for the creation of the joint venture, including the
     Master Subscription and Investment Agreement, were signed on 24 August 2016.
(6)  The notified operation constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Articles
     3(1)(b) and 3(4) of the Merger Regulation.
(7)  The joint venture consists of the existing businesses of DNB and Nordea in the
     Baltic States. The joint venture will perform on a lasting basis all the functions of
     an autonomous entity. It will have a management dedicated to its day-to-day
     operations, and access to sufficient resources including separate management,
     staff and assets necessary to conduct its business on a lasting basis in the Baltic
     States.
3.  EU DIMENSION
(8)  The Notifying Parties had initially notified the Transaction in Estonia, Latvia and
     Lithuania on the grounds that DNB and Nordea would not control Luminor,
     which standalone would not meet EU turnover thresholds. The Commission
     examined the transaction structure and concluded that the mother companies will
     exercise joint control over Luminor, and therefore they are the undertakings
     concerned by the Transaction.
(9)  The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
     more than EUR 5 000 million4 (Nordea: EUR 13 807 million, DNB: EUR 7 927
     million). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million
     (Nordea: EUR […] million, DNB: EUR […] million), but they do not achieve
     more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the
     same Member State. The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension
     pursuant to Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
4    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
     Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
                                                    2

4.   RELEVANT MARKETS
4.1.    Introduction to the banking markets in the Baltics
(10)    DNB and Nordea are Nordic-based universal banks active in the Baltics. Other
        universal banks of significant size active in the Baltic countries and which are
        also Nordic-based are Swedbank and SEB.
(11)    In general, most customers responding to the market investigation do not consider
        that there are substantial differences in general market conditions (e.g. type of
        financial providers, financial services offered, etc.) between the banking sectors
        in the Baltic countries as compared to other regions. However, some respondents
        did explain that the markets are relatively small in size and, based on that, some
        peculiarities exist. For example, customer explained that “Baltics are in different
        scale like other big European countries. If 10 M EUR loan in Latvia is considered
        as large loan, than in big countries and financial centers it is considered as small
        loan and no one will start to negotiate about possible credit facilities if it is only
        couple million EUR large.” Another customer explained that “In the Baltic states
        the spectrum of financial services is narrower compared to other market we work
        with, especially there is difference with UK.”5 Some customers considered the
        Baltic banks to offer better terms when compared to other countries.6
(12)    Competitors who responded to the market investigation also indicated that the
        Baltic markets are relatively small. They explained that whilst there are a number
        of financial providers active in the Baltic countries, the main players are all
        Scandinavian banks. In general, competition is considered to be relatively strong.7
4.2.    Markets affected by the transaction
(13)    The Transaction gives rise to a number of affected markets in retail banking and
        corporate banking.
4.2.1. Retail loans
4.2.1.1. Product market definition
(14)    Retail loans are part of the broader category of retail banking.
(15)    Retail banking comprises all banking services provided to private individuals and
        very small enterprises, such as deposits and account services (current accounts,
        saving accounts, cash deposits, cheque collection etc.); payment services
        including ATM services, payment card issuing, credit transfer, direct debit,
        standing orders and cheques; lending (personal loans, consumer credit, overdraft
        facilities, mortgages etc.); and investment products such as mutual funds, pension
        funds and securities brokerage and custody services (management of custody
5       Non-confidential replies to question 8 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
6       Non-confidential replies to question 8 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers. For example, one
        customer explains that “In Baltics banks are faster, offer better, more customized service to
        customers” “the financial services offered in the Baltic states are no different and sophisticated
        similarly to that in Sweden (…) the price level in the Baltic states is lower than that in Sweden
        probably due to higher competition among market participants.”
7       Non-confidential replies to question 5 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                        3

     accounts and processing of corporate actions such as dividend distribution). In
     many cases, banks are also active in distributing certain insurance products to
     their customers.
(16) In previous cases the Commission found that there exists a degree of supply-side
     substitutability between the various products for banks that already operate an
     established branch network and customer base. Often retail customers generally
     seek “a retail banking package” often including personal current account,
     payment services, savings accounts and consumer credit. At the same time the
     Commission noted that there is no demand-side substitutability between the
     different retail banking products. Furthermore, certain products, notably mortgage
     loans, may play a role in inducing customers to switch their current account from
     other banks.8 Consequently, the Commission has left open whether individual
     retail banking products represent separate relevant product markets or whether
     several retail banking products may form part of a single relevant product
     market.9
(17) As regards retail loans in previous cases the Commission has considered the
     existence of markets for personal loans, consumer loans/consumer credits and
     mortgages. The Commission found that for example loans and mortgages may
     serve different purposes and may have distinctive features and thus may need to
     be considered distinct product markets.10 The Commission has not concluded as
     to whether the relevant market should comprise all retail loans or whether each of
     personal loans, consumer loans and mortgages each constitute a distinct product
     market.11
(18) The Notifying Parties submit that retail lending segmentation is based on whether
     a specific loan is supported by a security interest in favour of the bank or not:
     mortgages are lower-risk products and unsecured are riskier. Product
     segmentation is also based on the customer needs that the specific retail loan
     product seeks to address. In particular banks would distinguish credit card loans
     or credit lines, which satisfy immediate generic consumption needs, from loans
     linked to specific consumption categories, such as car loans or consumer credit to
     purchase appliances. In general, the Notifying Parties submit that the
     Commission's previous approach can be applied to the present case.
(19) The results of the market investigation concerning the overall retail banking
     confirm that from the supply-side perspective, for a given category of customers,
     the position of a bank in a particular product (e.g. retail loans) will to large extent
     depend on its ability to provide other products to the same type of customer. At
     the same time many competitors underline that customers are free to decide which
     products to take from any bank, that product tying is not allowed on the market
     and it is possible to be a one product bank in the market.12 Furthermore, almost all
     competitors agree that within the retail banking market one should distinguish
     different products, e.g. personal current accounts, saving accounts, consumer
8    COMP/M.3894 – Unicredit / HVB.
9    COMP/M.3894 – Unicredit / HVB, COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro.
10   COMP/M.3894 – Unicredit / HVB.
11   COMP/M.3894 – Unicredit / HVB, COMP/M.4356 – Deutsche Bank / Berliner Bank, COMP/M.5811
     – Erste Bank / ASK.
12   Non-confidential replies to question 6 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                     4

        loans or mortgages.13 It is thus quite clear that in particular retail loans should be
        considered a distinct product market. However, the results of the market
        investigation are not conclusive as to whether the retail loans market should be
        further segmented or not. The majority of competitors consider that it is not
        necessary to further segment the market for retail loans, while one third of the
        responding competitors say the opposite.14 In this regard a competitor explained
        that it “[...] considers that retail loans are easy substitutable therefore there is no
        need to further distinguish between different types of retail loans.”15 Another
        competitor submits that such distinctions should be made, since depending on the
        product and collateral, the probability of default differs significantly.16
(20)    In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the internal market in relation to retail loans under any
        plausible market definition, for the purposes of the competitive assessment of the
        Transaction it can be left open whether retail loans form a distinct product market
        or whether they should be further segmented in particular into consumer credits,
        current account and payment card loans and housing loans (mortgages).
4.2.1.2. Geographic market definition
(21)    In its previous decisions, the Commission has considered that, with regard to
        retail banking services, the relevant geographic market is national in scope due to
        the different competitive conditions within individual Member States and the
        importance of a network of branches.17 In some cases the Commission considered
        a subnational/regional scope of the banking market, depending on the
        characteristics of the countries concerned, but left it open whether the market
        should be considered national or subnational.18 In the present case, taking into
        account the size of the countries concerned by the Transaction, and the
        homogenous conditions within each of these countries, the markets seem to be
        national in scope.
(22)    The Notifying Parties submit that, although innovation in electronic
        communications has reduced the importance of having a well-developed network
        of branches, the remaining differences in the competitive environment within
        individual Member States continue to support the conclusion that the markets are
        national in scope.
(23)    All of the respondents to the market investigation consider that the market for
        retail loans is national in geographic scope.19
13      Non-confidential replies to question 9 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
14      Non-confidential replies to question 10 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
15      Non-confidential replies to question 10 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
16      Non-confidential replies to question 10 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
17      COMP/M.2578 – Banco Santander Central Hispano / AKB, COMP/M.3894 – Unicredit / HVB,
        COMP/M.4356 – Deutsche Bank / Berliner Bank, COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN AMRO Assets,
        COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis, COMP/M.5811 – Erste Bank / ASK.
18      COMP/M.3894 Unicredito/HVB, Commission decision of 18 October 2005, COMP/M.4356 –
        Deutsche Bank/Berliner Bank, COMP/M.5811 – Erste Bank/ASK.
19      Non-confidential replies to questions 106 and 107 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                        5

(24)    In view of the above for the purpose of the present decision, the Commission
        concludes that the geographic scope of the markets in the area of retail loans is
        national.
4.2.2. Corporate banking markets
4.2.2.1. Product market
(25)    Corporate banking comprises a broad range of banking services offered to general
        corporate clients. It excludes banking services between financial institutions: due
        to the difference in the market participants and competitive environment – inter-
        banking markets are considered to form distinct markets from corporate banking,
        irrespective of the size of the client.20
(26)    The Commission has, in previous cases, found that it may be appropriate to
        distinguish between services offered to small- and medium-sized enterprises
        (SMEs) and large corporate customers (LCCs), although it has observed that there
        is no obvious single parameter by which companies can be designated as SMEs or
        LCCs, and which would be applicable to all market players in a given market.21
(27)    The Notifying Parties submit that in the three Baltic countries it is not relevant to
        distinguish between SMEs and LCCs, in particular because both categories of
        corporate customers are offered the same products.
(28)    A small majority of competitors responding to the market investigation consider
        that this distinction is generally applicable to the Baltic countries.22 For instance a
        competitor explained that the “customer relationship is more important. LCC
        require more complex products and dedicated commercial relationships with
        banks.”23 Another competitor indicated that “the needs of SME are different to big
        companies, which tend to have tailor-made solutions for loans and daily
        banking.”24 On the other hand, more than 40% of responding competitors indicate
        that the distinction is not relevant in the Baltic countries. They explain in
        particular that this is because “general product terms and conditions are the
        same.” They also indicate that projects are assessed individually, irrespective of
        the size of the customer: “the offer does not depend on the clients segment, but on
        other factors (counterparty, customer rating etc.).”25
(29)    Furthermore, the Notifying Parties note that their largest clients in the Baltic
        countries are relatively small when compared to other countries in which they
        operate (e.g. Scandinavia, larger EU countries) and that there is no clear
        definition of LCCs and SMEs in the context of the banking products that would
        be recognised by all the suppliers. The Notifying Parties’ internal segmentation of
        LCCs and SMEs differs to some extent, but they suggest that a threshold of 20
20      COMP/M.873 – Bank Austria / Creditanstalt, COMP/M.5861 – Republik Österreich / Hypo
        Group Alpe Adria.
21      See for example COMP/M. 2567 – Nordbanken / Postgirot, COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito / HVB,
        COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN AMRO Assets.
22      Non-confidential replies to question 23 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
23      Non-confidential replies to question 23 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
24      Non-confidential replies to question 23 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
25      Non-confidential replies to question 30 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                        6

        MEUR turnover would be an appropriate proxy to distinguish larger clients
        should the Commission consider the distinction between LCCs and SMEs to be
        relevant in this case.
(30)    Indeed, the market investigation showed that companies take into account various
        factors in addition to turnover when determining the size of their corporate clients
        (e.g. number of employees, assets value, etc.), although it appears that the
        turnover represents a good proxy to determine whether a customer is part or not
        of the LCCs segment. The market investigation did not provide a clear indication
        of which turnover should be used to distinguish LCCs and SMEs since every
        company has its own internal segmentation. However, the threshold of 20 MEUR
        appears to be in line with many responses.26
(31)    The Commission considers that for the purpose of this case it can be left open
        whether the corporate banking market should be segmented into products for
        LCCs and SMEs or not, as in any case the competitive assessment of the
        Transaction remains the same.
4.2.2.2. Geographic market
(32)    In previous cases the Commission considered the market for banking services
        offered to SMEs to be national in scope, while for LCCs it considered both a
        national and wider scope of the market.27
(33)    In response to the market investigation most customers indicated that they source
        financial services at the national level and not from suppliers outside the Baltic
        country where they are active.28 Likewise, most competitors consider that in the
        Baltic countries competition takes place mainly at the national level.29
(34)    The results of the market investigation suggest that competition takes place at the
        national level also with regard to LCCs in the Baltic countries. Many competitors
        explained competition occurs at a supranational level only in exceptional
        circumstances and very specific situations. As one competitor explained: "In
        individual cases large corporate customers may seek credit from the lending
        institutions in other Baltic state or a syndicated credit from more than one credit
        institution in different states. However these are exceptional cases involving large
        sums."30
(35)    In view of the above, the Commission considers that, for the purpose of the
        present decision, the markets for banking services offered to LCCs are national in
        scope. In any event the competitive assessment of the Transaction would not
        change should the market be considered EEA-wide for any category of customers
        or products, since on such a market the Parties’ market shares would be far below
        affected market thresholds.
26      Non-confidential replies to question 24 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
27      See for example COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito / HVB, COMP/M.2567 – Nordbanken / Postgirot.
28      Non-confidential replies to question 7 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
29      Non-confidential replies to question 106 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
30      Non-confidential replies to question 107 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                        7

4.2.3. Corporate loans
4.2.3.1. Product market definition
(36)    In previous cases the Commission has identified a distinct product market for
        corporate lending. The Commission has considered segmenting the market for
        corporate loans according to the size of customers (large corporate clients and
        smaller commercial clients such as SMEs), but ultimately left it open whether
        such segmentation is necessary.31 Moreover, the Commission considered
        distinguishing real estate financing as a distinct product market, but ultimately left
        the question open.32
(37)    Finally, in the past the Commission considered that financing of public authorities
        is separate product market given that both the customers and the market
        conditions differ from those existing for corporate banking.33 In particular, credit
        to local authorities has been considered a product in its own right because
        customers and conditions of loans differ from normal bank loans.34
(38)    The Notifying Parties submit that regardless of the type of loan, all lending
        products are designed to finance working capital needs or investment projects.
        Thus, all lending products meet customers’ demand for the provision of credit,
        irrespective of its intended use. The Notifying Parties also argue that there is also
        considerable supply side substitutability between different types of loans, with the
        only real constraint being the need for initial capital. The Notifying Parties
        therefore submit that there is a single relevant market for corporate loans.
(39)    Moreover, the Notifying Parties submit data on their position on the market for
        the financing of public authorities in each Baltic country, in line with
        Commission’s precedents. However, they indicate that no distinction between
        financing provided to the different levels of public authorities (local, central, etc.)
        is relevant for the present case. In Estonia, there is no significant difference in the
        regulatory and competitive environment for public finances at different levels of
        government. In Latvia and Lithuania, whilst a distinction could be made between
        central government, local government and government agencies, all main
        competitors are active in the financing to different levels of public authorities, and
        there are no entry barriers or costs related to switching between supplying the
        various levels.
(40)    The market investigation results confirmed that there is a distinct market for
        corporate loans. As explained at paragraph 28, the market investigation did not
        provide a clear indication as to whether corporate banking markets (including
        corporate loans) should be segmented according to the size of customers into
        loans to LCCs and SMEs. The results of the market investigation were
31      COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis.
32      COMP/M.2567 – Nordbanken / Postgirot, COMP/M.6168 – RBI / EFG EUROBANK / JV.
33      COMP/M.873 – Bank Austria / Creditanstalt, COMP/M.5861 – Republik Osterreich / Hypo
        Group Alpe Adria.
34      See for example COMP/M.1254 – Dexia / Argentaria / Credito Local.
                                                   8

        inconclusive as to whether real estate financing should constitute a distinct
        product market.35
(41)    The results of the market investigation were also inconclusive as to whether loans
        offered to public authorities should be distinguished as a distinct product market
        in the Baltic countries.36 Many competitors replying to the market investigation
        explained that they do offer lending products to public authorities and that there
        are no major constraints in starting to provide services to public authorities.
        However, other competitors explained that they do distinguish between products
        offered to corporate clients and those offered to public authorities since products
        characteristics (e.g. pricing, covenant structure) tend to be different.37
(42)    The results of the market investigation did not support a distinction of the market
        for public financing based on the level of government in the Baltic countries. The
        majority of competitors explained that they do provide services to different levels
        of public authorities (central government, local municipalities, etc.) and that
        products offered are generally the same.38
(43)    In view of the above, for the purpose of this decision, the market for the financing
        of public authorities is considered to be a separate relevant product market.
(44)    In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the internal market in relation to corporate loans under any
        plausible market definition, for the purposes of the competitive assessment of the
        Transaction it can be left open whether the market should be further segmented
        into loans to LCCs and loans to SMEs, and whether loans to real estate form a
        distinct product market.
4.2.3.2. Geographic market definition
(45)    As explained in Section 4.2.2.2 above, for the purpose of this decision, the
        markets for corporate banking products (including loans) are considered to be
        national in scope.
(46)    The Commission has previously considered the market for the financing to public
        authorities national in scope.39 The Notifying Parties agree with this and the
        market investigation results are in line with Commission’s precedents.40
4.2.4. Corporate deposits
4.2.4.1. Product market definition
(47)    In previous cases the Commission identified a distinct product market for
        corporate deposits and savings, and observed extensive demand substitutability
        between different types of products.41
35      Non-confidential replies to question 33 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
36      Non-confidential replies to question 31 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
37      Non-confidential replies to question 32 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
38      Non-confidential replies to question 32 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
39      COMP/M.2400 – Dexia / Artesia, COMP/M.5861 – Republik Osterreich / Hypo Group Alpe
        Adria.
40      Non-confidential replies to question 106 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                        9

(48)    The Notifying Parties agree that there appears to be extensive substitutability
        between various saving products. In addition they argue that deposits, as well as
        other savings products, such as bonds (including Government savings bonds) and
        money market investment funds are products with similar risk and therefore are
        considered as substitutes from the customers’ point of view.
(49)    However, the Notifying Parties also explain that currently due to low interest
        rates most corporate clients choose to keep their savings at current accounts
        instead of using other savings products. Therefore, they have provided their data
        under the narrower market definition comprising corporate deposits, including
        current accounts.
(50)    The market investigation results confirmed that corporate deposits constitute a
        distinct market from other corporate banking products. The results of the market
        investigation were inconclusive as to whether a distinction should be made
        between corporate deposits offered to SMEs and to LCCs, indicating a variety of
        practices for the different financial service providers.42 For instance a competitor
        explained that “pricing depends on term, amount, currency, client group,
        regulatory treatment (insured or not), stability of deposit.”43 On the other hand
        another competitor considers that “there is a need to distinguish corporate
        deposits offered to SMEs and LCCs due to difference in deposits pricing and risk
        profile.”44
(51)    In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the internal market in relation to corporate deposits under any
        plausible market definition, for the purposes of the competitive assessment of the
        Transaction it can be left open whether the market should be further segmented
        into deposits to LCCs and deposits to SMEs.
4.2.4.2. Geographic market definition
(52)    As explained in Section 4.2.2.2, for the purpose of this decision, the markets for
        corporate banking (including corporate deposits) are considered to be national in
        scope.
4.2.5. Leasing
4.2.5.1. Product market definition
(53)    Leasing is a contractual arrangement between the lessee (user of an asset) and the
        lessor (legal owner of an asset) according to which the lessee obtains the right to
        use an asset in return for regular rental payments. It may relate to a wide variety
        of assets such as transportation vehicles, industrial and agricultural machines,
        office equipment etc.
(54)    In previous cases, the Commission considered a distinction between (i)
        operational leasing, in which ownership of the relevant asset is typically not
41      COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis.
42      Non-confidential replies to question 26 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
43      Non-confidential replies to question 26 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
44      Non-confidential replies to question 26 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                        10

     transferred to the lessee at the end of the lease and the risk of ownership are
     retained by the lessor, and (ii) financial leasing, which is generally for a longer
     period, during which the lessee fully repays the asset cost and in result acquires
     the ownership of the relevant asset at the end of the lease.45 The Commission has
     also considered segmentations of the leasing market i) according to the types of
     assets which are leased (cars, office equipment etc.), and ii) according to the size
     of customers. It was left open whether the leasing market should be segmented
     according to any of these criteria.46
(55) The Notifying Parties do not contest the previous findings of the Commission as
     regards plausible segmentation of the leasing markets and submitted data for
     leasing markets in general, distinguished into operational and financial leasing,
     depending on the size of customers as well as leasing markets segmented by asset
     type.
(56) The market investigation results show that there is a distinct market for leasing.
     As regards the distinction between operational and financial leasing the results are
     mixed. Some competitors explained that these are totally different products,
     different from legal and accounting perspective and that often customers have a
     clear preference for one or the other.47 One competitor explained that operational
     leasing is more common for new assets, while financial leasing suits all types of
     assets, but is preferable for used assets.48 Other competitors do not consider this
     distinction to be relevant, as almost all the competitors who offer leasing services
     provide both operational and financial leasing; and it would be easy for a
     company offering one type of leasing to start offering other types.49
(57) As regards operational leasing in particular, most respondents consider that it
     could be further segmented according to the type of asset which is leased (e.g.
     cars, industrial equipment, office equipment).50 As for financial leasing the
     market investigation did not show conclusive results on the question of whether
     this market can be further segmented according to the type of asset which is
     leased.51
(58) The majority of responding competitors do not make a distinction between
     leasing provided to SMEs and leasing provided to LCCs and they offer leasing
     services to all categories of customers.52 Approximately one third of suppliers
45   COMP/M.2970 – GE / ABB Structured Finance, COMP/M.3090 – Volkswagen / Offset / Crescent
     / LeasePlan / JV, COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas /
     Fortis, COMP/M.7944 – Credit Mutual / GE Capital's Factoring and Equipment Financing
     Businesses in France and Germany.
46   COMP/M.5217 – GEFA / PEMA, COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas/Fortis, COMP/M.7944 – Credit
     Mutuel / GE Capital’s Factoring and Equipment Financing Businesses in France and Germany.
47   Non-confidential replies to question 73 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
48   Non-confidential replies to question 73 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
49   Non-confidential replies to questions 72, 73 and 78 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors. For
     example: “We see here no obstructions in switching from one leasing type offering to another
     (and vice versa).”
50   Non-confidential replies to question 74 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors. As explained by a
     competitor: “Risks included into products differ so much that it's not possible to keep these
     products in one bucket.”
51   Non-confidential replies to question 75 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
52   Non-confidential replies to question 76 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors. As explained by
     one competitor: “Offering as such does not differ between LCC and SME segments, although
                                                     11

     consider that such a distinction is relevant, for example because in their overall
     offering they focus on one of these two categories.53
(59) In reply to the market investigation some respondents, in particular competitors,
     indicated that Nordea, and post-transaction the merged entity, will be particularly
     strong in a specific area of leasing, called white label leasing.54 The white label
     leasing is provided by leasing / financial institutions to the sellers of assets. For
     example manufacturers or retailers of cars enter into white label leasing
     agreements with banks in order to provide leasing services (financial or
     operational) to their end-customers under their own name. The market
     investigation did not confirm that white label leasing should be considered a
     distinct product market.55
(60) From the demand side perspective: end-customers, who for example take on a
     lease on an asset, are always free to choose between the manufacturer’s/retailer's
     white label leasing offer and an identical leasing offer from a bank or other
     financial service providers. Indeed, the white label leasing product offered by the
     asset manufacturer or retailer has exactly the same characteristics of the leasing
     product the end-customer can obtain from a financial service provider, the only
     difference being the fact that the former is purchased together with the underlying
     asset, and the latter in parallel to it. Second, the intermediary customers, i.e.
     parties to the white label leasing contracts (manufacturers and/or retailers which
     conclude overall white label leasing agreements), in response to the market
     investigation indicate that if their current supplier wanted to increase prices they
     would switch to another supplier of leasing, as other leasing suppliers are able to
     provide the same product, irrespective of whether they currently have white label
     contracts in place or not. This is because there is no difference between a white
     label leasing product and a similar type of leasing product, other than the fact that
     the 'white label' means that the leasing product will be subsequently sold by the
     intermediary customer to the end-customer together with the underlying asset. In
     this regard a respondent explained that it would “switch immediately. Market
     wouldn’t accept the increase.”
(61) Similarly, on the supply side, competitors indicate that they would be willing to
     enter into white label leasing agreements, even if currently they do not have white
     label leasing contracts in place. Most of the competitors either (i) consider that
     one should not single-out white label leasing from the overall leasing market, or
     (ii) do not take a view on this. Those who do not consider white label leasing to
     be a separate market notably explain that it is effectively just a different sales
     channel, while there is no difference in the leasing product itself.56 As for the
     remaining suppliers, who indicate that one might consider white-label leasing
     separately from the other leasing products, some of them explained that it is
     different in terms of “cooperation initiation: conclusion of cooperation
     particular conditions and pricing on the transaction depends on individual factors: financial
     performance, general relationship, experience, etc.”
53   Non-confidential replies to question 76 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
54   Minutes of the conference calls with competitors of 24 July 2017 and 1 August 2017.
55   Non-confidential replies to question 77 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
56   Non-confidential replies to question 79 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors. For example:
     “White label leasing products compete in market with standard leasing products”; “sales channel
     does not affect the essence of the transaction.”
                                                      12

     agreement is rather complicated and time-consuming process, which usually is
     tender-based and takes place on importer, or even producer level.”57
(62) As regards this last point, the Commission notes that white label leasing
     agreements between suppliers and customers, such as product manufacturers or
     retailers, usually follow a bidding procedure. Contracts are subsequently
     concluded for a period of a number of years, and include predetermined terms for
     leasing services, including price. Thus, suppliers of leasing cannot increase prices
     without changing the agreements; in case leasing suppliers considered increasing
     prices for customers, i.e. manufacturers/dealers, these would rather organise a
     new bidding process (either an open tender or an invitation to bid) to which all
     potential suppliers, i.e. all suppliers of leasing products (including those that
     currently do not have ongoing white label leasing agreements in place) would be
     able to participate in the tender.
(63) Overall the market investigation results clearly demonstrate that white label
     leasing is offered by the same companies that act on the regular leasing market,
     that they ultimately aim at the same customer base to offer them leasing products.
(64) The Commission notes, first, that this consideration would mainly apply to LCCs.
     In this regard most competitors do not consider that a distinction would need to be
     made between white label leasing to LCCs and SMEs.58
(65) Second, the Commission notes that virtually all the competitors indicated that
     there are no barriers preventing a company offering leasing services, but not
     white label leasing, to start offering white label leasing.59 One of competitors
     explained: “the leasing offering company has to have VAT registration, but this is
     just [solved by submitting an] application. Otherwise there are no limitations to
     start offering leasing alone or together with vendors.” 60
(66) In light of the above, the Commission considers that white label leasing should
     not be treated as a distinct product market.
(67) In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
     compatibility with the internal market in relation to leasing under any plausible
     market definition, it can be left open whether there is one relevant product market
     for leasing or whether it should be segmented i) into operational and financial
     leasing, ii) according to the size of customers LCCs/SMEs, and/or iii) according
     to the type of assets leased.
57   Non-confidential replies to question 79 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
58   Non-confidential replies to question 79 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
59   Non-confidential replies to question 80 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors. For example: “If
     the tender is open, there are no barriers. Each market player should individually assess business
     case before the entry.”
60   Non-confidential replies to question 80 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                     13

4.2.5.2. Geographic market definition
(68)    The Commission has previously considered the market for leasing to be national
        in scope.61
(69)    The Notifying Parties submit that the geographic scope of leasing should be
        considered national. They explain that this reasoning is mainly based on the
        understanding of the demand side considerations of the customers in each Baltic
        State.
(70)    In reply to the market investigation in general customers do not consider the
        market for leasing to be wider than national.62 Likewise, most competitors
        consider that in the Baltic countries competition on the leasing market takes place
        mainly at the national level.63
(71)    In view of the above, for the purpose of this decision the markets for leasing and
        all its plausible segments are considered to be national in scope.
4.2.6. Factoring
(72)    Factoring consists in the purchase of all kinds of receivables from businesses,
        thereby providing them with liquidity.64
(73)    In previous cases the Commission considered segmenting factoring services into
        the following categories: (i) prepayment on the value of invoices, (ii) invoice
        collection and sales ledger management services, (iii) credit insurance, and (iv)
        services comprising a package of all of the above.65
(74)    The Notifying Parties explain that in the three Baltic countries one may
        distinguish three types of factoring: with insurance (when the provider of
        factoring has no recourse to the invoice issuer in case of non-payment), without
        insurance (in which case unpaid invoices are returned to the factoring customer)
        and so called reverse factoring (whereby the bank offers to provide liquidity to its
        client's suppliers against receivables issued by the client).
4.2.6.1. Product market definition
(75)    The Notifying Parties argue that the different types of factoring belong to the
        same product market.
(76)    First, as regards the demand side, the Notifying Parties submit that there is a
        blurred line between different types of factoring since when entering into
        factoring agreement the parties agree on the main elements (i.e. financing, debt
        management and recourse rights) and arrange the contract so that it meets the
        customer's needs.
61      COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis, COMP/M.7944 – Credit Mutuel / GE Capital's Factoring
        and Equipment Financing Businesses in France and Germany.
62      Non-confidential replies to question 7 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
63      Non-confidential replies to question 106 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
64      COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito / HVB.
65      COMP/M.2577 – GE Capital / Heller Financial.
                                                        14

(77)    Second, the Notifying Parties submit that there is extensive supply side
        substitutability between various types of factoring in view of the fact that various
        types of factoring can be provided with the same pool of expertise, the same IT
        system can be used and no significant adjustments are needed in order to start
        providing different types of factoring.
(78)    The results of the market investigation show that not all financial service
        providers supply all types of factoring and that some of them tend to specialise in
        certain types of factoring. Also, many respondents mentioned the importance of
        having a wide product offering in order to be able to compete effectively on the
        market.66 For instance a competitor explained the competitive edge experienced
        in many cases by “banks that are able to provide more types of factoring or more
        flexible tailor made solutions to get the client.”67 Therefore, customers would not
        necessarily be able to obtain, add or switch to different types of factoring in a
        seamless way.
(79)    As for supply-side substitutability, overall competitors indicate that it would be
        relatively difficult for them to start offering other types of factoring which they
        currently do not offer (recourse, non-recourse or reverse factoring).68 In this
        regard a competitor explained that “IT system development, probably 6-12 months
        and several millions of costs.”69 Another competitor indicated that the “launching
        of new product is quite time consuming and costly. Depends of course on the type
        of factoring but it may include new agreements with third parties. It also contains
        internal regulations and procedures, sales materials, training, testing.”70
(80)    Most competitors do not distinguish between factoring provided to SMEs and
        factoring provided to LCCs71 and do not consider that any other relevant criterion
        should be used to segment factoring services offered in the Baltic States.72
(81)    In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the internal market in relation to factoring under any plausible
        market definition, it can be left open whether there is one relevant market for
        factoring or whether one should distinguish factoring with insurance from
        factoring without insurance. The Commission considers that it is not relevant for
        the purpose of this Transaction to distinguish separate factoring markets based on
        the size of customers.
4.2.6.2. Geographic market definition
(82)    In previous decisions the Commission considered the factoring market to be
        national.73
66      Non-confidential replies to question 62 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
67      Non-confidential replies to question 62 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
68      Non-confidential replies to question 59 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
69      Non-confidential replies to question 59 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
70      Non-confidential replies to question 59 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
71      Non-confidential replies to question 60 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
72      Non-confidential replies to question 61 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
73      COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, COMP/M.7947 – Banco Santander Totta / Banif.
                                                        15

(83)    The Notifying Parties submit that the geographic market for factoring is national
        in scope.
(84)    Most customers indicated that they source factoring services at a national level.74
        Likewise, most competitors consider that in the Baltic countries competition for
        factoring services takes place mainly at the national level.75
(85)    In view of the above, for the purpose of this decision the markets for factoring
        and its plausible segments are considered to be national in scope.
4.2.7. Documentary credits
(86)    Documentary credits comprise letters of credit, collection and guarantees supplied
        to corporate customers. Whether letters of credit, collection and guarantees should
        be considered as one single or separate product markets and whether a distinction
        should be made between SMEs and larger corporate customers was left open in
        previous cases.76
4.2.7.1. Product market definition
(87)    The Notifying Parties consider that letters of credit, documentary collection and
        guarantees could be considered part of the same product market, since they are all
        intended to reduce the risk inherent in trade. Thus, the Parties explain that there is
        some demand side substitutability.
(88)    On the supply-side, the Notifying Parties submit that whilst it is easier to start
        providing guarantees than other types of documentary credits, the main banks in
        the Baltics provide guarantees, documentary collection and letters of credit, thus
        the different level of know-how required does not seem to influence the scope of
        trade finance instruments provided by the main players in the market.
(89)    The market investigation results tends to confirm that the market for documentary
        credits should not be further segmented. Indeed, most customers indicated that in
        the event of a 5-10% price increase for one type of documentary credit instrument
        (e.g. letters of credit) while the prices of other documentary credit instruments
        remained unchanged, they would switch to another type of service (e.g.
        guarantees).77
(90)    However this ability to switch seems to depend on the specific situation. For
        instance a customer explains that “in some cases they are not interchangeable as
        they are used for different tasks. Different suppliers have different risks, in some
        case it is used just for supply risk coverage (if supplier is riskier – LC [letter of
        credit] is better), in other cases payment risk coverage from supplier (BG [bank
        guarantee] can be enough and is better than LC [letter of credit] as it requires less
        transactional costs for constant deliveries) and in another case payment risk
74      Non-confidential replies to question 7 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
75      Non-confidential replies to question 106 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
76      COMP/M.4844 – Fortis /ABN Amro Assets, COMP/M.5293 – Santander / Alliance & Leicester.
77      Non-confidential replies to question 6 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
                                                        16

        coverage and together possibility to cash out money before the term for supplier
        (in this case just LC [letter of credit] with deferred payment term can be used).”78
(91)    On the supply side, most competitors explain that it would be relatively easy for
        them to switch their offering from one specify type of documentary credit
        instrument (e.g. letters of credit) to another (e.g. collection).79 Also, most
        competitors do not distinguish between documentary credits provided to SMEs
        and documentary credits provided to LCCs.80
(92)    In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the internal market in relation to documentary credits under
        any plausible market definition, for the purposes of the competitive assessment of
        the Transaction it can be left open whether there are separate product markets for
        letters of credit, documentary collection and guarantees or whether they all form
        one distinct product market and whether they should segmented according to the
        size of customers.
4.2.7.2. Geographic market definition
(93)    As for any corporate banking products, the Commission has considered the
        market for documentary credits offered to SMEs to be national in scope, while for
        LCCs it considered both a national and wider scope of the market.81
(94)    The Notifying Parties submit that the geographic scope for trade finance
        instruments is national.
(95)    Most customers responding to the market investigation indicated that they source
        documentary credits at a national level.82 Likewise, most competitors consider
        that in the Baltic countries competition for documentary credits takes place
        mainly at the national level.83
(96)    Thus, for the purpose of this case the market for documentary credits will be
        considered to be national in scope.
4.2.8. Payment card issuing
4.2.8.1. Product market definition
(97)    The Commission has in the past distinguished two card-related activities: the
        issuing of cards and the acquiring of merchants for card payment acceptance.84
        The present transaction leads to overlaps only in the area of card issuing. Further,
        the Commission considered segmenting the market according to different types of
        cards according to different criteria: type of payment card scheme (international /
78      Non-confidential replies to question 6 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
79      Non-confidential replies to question 47 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
80      Non-confidential replies to question 48 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
81      COMP/M.2567 – Nordbanken / Postgirot, COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito / HVB, COMP/M.4844 –
        Fortis / ABN Amro Assets.
82      Non-confidential replies to question 7 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
83      Non-confidential replies to question 106 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
84      COMP/M.5241 – American Express / Fortis / Alpha Card, COMP/M.7873 – Worldline / Equens /
        Paysquare.
                                                        17

        domestic), type of card (debit / credit), brands (e.g. Visa, MasterCard), type of
        customers (cards issued to retail customers and cards issued to corporate
        customers) but left the product market definition open.85
(98)    The Notifying Parties submit that the relevant market should be defined as
        payment card issuing, including both debit card issuing and credit card issuing. At
        the same time the Notifying Parties acknowledge that in general one can segment
        payment cards i) into credit and debit cards and ii) according to customers into
        retail and corporate. The Notifying Parties submit that there is no need to
        distinguish cards depending on the size of corporate customers to which cards are
        issued. Finally, the Notifying Parties note that in Lithuania the distinction
        between general and special purpose cards is irrelevant, since special purpose
        cards are not being issued there.
(99)    Most competitors consider that the market for card issuing should be segmented,
        although the criteria tend to vary i.e. some mention a segmentation according to
        the type of card (e.g. international vs national cards, debit or credit cards,
        selective or general cards, based on the card brand, etc.) and others according to
        the types of client (e.g. retail vs corporate).86 The distinctions between corporate
        and retail cards and between credit and debit cards seem to be more widely
        recognised by the market participants. As regards different brands, the Notifying
        Parties explain that Visa, Mastercard and American Express branded cards
        comprise 100% of the market in Lithuania, DNB issues Visa payment cards and
        Nordea issues Mastercard, therefore if the market was segmented according to
        brands the transaction would not lead to any overlap.
(100) In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the internal market in relation to payment card issuing under
        any plausible market definition, for the purpose of this case it can be left open
        whether there is one relevant market for card issuing or whether it should be
        segmented distinguishing i) credit and debit card issuance and ii) issuing for
        corporate and for retail customers. As explained distinctions between general and
        special purpose cards issuing and between various brands of cards are irrelevant
        in the present case.
4.2.8.2. Geographic market definition
(101) In previous cases the Commission considered that the market for card issuance is
        national in scope but it recognised the possibility of widening the market in the
        future.87 The Notifying Parties submit that the geographic market for payment
        card issuing is national.
(102) The vast majority of customers indicate that they source banking services, in
        particular payment card issuing at a national level. Only a small portion of
        corporate customers indicate that they do or they could source some banking
85      COMP/M.2567 – Nordbanken / Postgirot, COMP/M.3740 – Barclays Bank / Föreningssparbanken
        / JV, COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito / HVB, COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro Assets,
        COMP/M.5241 – American Express / Fortis / Alpha Card, COMP/M.7873 – Worldline / Equens /
        Paysquare.
86      Non-confidential replies to question 95 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
87      COMP/M.5241 – American Express / Fortis / Alpha Credit, COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro
        Assets.
                                                        18

        services including payment cards issuing at supra-national level. In any event for
        domestic payments they choose domestic cards issued by domestic/national
        suppliers.88 Likewise, most competitors consider that in the Baltic countries
        competition for payment card issuing takes place mainly at the national level.89
(103) Thus, for the purpose of this case the market for payment card issuing will be
        assessed at national level. In any event, should the market be wider than national
        in scope the market for payment cards issuing would not be affected by the
        Transaction.
4.2.9. Payments
4.2.9.1. Product market definition
(104) Payments or cashless transactions include various types of payments services:
        credit transfers (initiated by payer, from one account to another), direct debits
        (payments ordered by the payee on the basis of payer’s consent), card payments,
        payments by cheque and other payment services (mostly payments via
        telecommunication, IT etc.).
(105) In general all the (universal) banks offer all these payment services.
(106) In previous cases the Commission identified a distinct product market for
        domestic payment services and international payment services.90 The Commission
        considered also the market for payments separately in the context of retail
        banking services (as the payment processing services including ATM services are
        provided together with personal current accounts) and in the context of corporate
        banking services (namely, processing payment transactions for corporate
        customers).91
(107) The Notifying Parties submit that it is no longer appropriate to differentiate
        between domestic and international corporate payments, since all the three Baltic
        countries have introduce euro currency and SEPA. Instead, the Notifying Parties
        suggest including all payment services, both domestic and international, and
        rendered to both corporate and retail clients, in a single product market for non-
        cash payment services.
(108) The Notifying Parties suggest two reasons for this. First, the introduction of the
        Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) in the EU, including the Baltic States has
        removed many of the differences in treatment between domestic and international
        payments. Secondly, in the opinion of the Notifying Parties, the distinction
        between payment services to corporate clients and payment services to retail
        clients would not be justifiable due to significant supply-side substitutability.
(109) Most respondents to the market investigation consider that the market for
        payment services should be segmented into separate markets according to the
        type of service, i.e. domestic as opposed to international payments. Domestic
88      Non-confidential replies to question 7 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
89      Non-confidential replies to question 106 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
90      COMP/M.4844 – Fortis / ABN Amro Assets, COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis.
91      COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito / HVB, COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis.
                                                        19

        would be however understood as SEPA payments as opposed to international, i.e.
        non-SEPA payments.92 For instance a competitor explained that “payment
        services segmentation is needed based on type of service as cost base is different
        for SEPA payments and other cross-border payments”. Respondents to the market
        investigation consider that it is not necessary to further segment the market for
        payment services: “Segmentation based on types of clients is not relevant, as
        products used by different clients are the same.”93
(110) In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the internal market in relation to payments under any plausible
        market definition, it can be left open whether there is one relevant market for
        payments or one should distinguish domestic payments (here SEPA payments)
        and international (non-SEPA) payments or whether separate payment markets
        should be distinguished for retail and corporate customers.
4.2.9.2. Geographic market definition
(111) In previous cases the Commission considered the market for banking services and
        in particular payments offered to SMEs to be national in scope, while for LCCs it
        considered both a national and wider scope of the market.94 As explained in
        Section 4.2.2.2 above, for the purposed of this decision the Commission considers
        that in the three Baltic countries the geographic market for all corporate
        customers (also large) is national in scope.
(112) The Notifying Parties submit that the market for payments is national.
(113) In response to the market investigation the vast majority of customers explained
        that they source payment services at national level, although some exceptionally
        source payment services at supra-national level.95 Similarly, most competitors
        consider that in the Baltic countries competition for payments services takes place
        mainly at the national level.96
(114) In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the internal market in relation to payment services under any
        plausible market definition, it can be left open whether geographic market for
        payments is national or EEA-wide in scope. For the purposed of this decision the
        competitive assessment will be made based on the national scope of the market,
        as should the geographic scope be wider, the payments market would not be
        affected by the Transaction.
4.2.10. Financial market services
4.2.10.1. Product market definition
(115) Financial market services comprise services such as trading (on an agent or
        riskless principal basis) in securities, bonds and derivatives as well as foreign
92      Non-confidential replies to question 94 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
93      Non-confidential replies to question 94 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
94      COMP/M.2567 – Nordbanken / Postgirot, COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito / HVB.
95      Non-confidential replies to question 7 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
96      Non-confidential replies to question 106 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                        20

       exchange trading, money market operations (i.e. trading in treasury bills and
       commercial paper from banks and companies) and other asset classes.97
(116) In previous cases, the Commission has left open the question whether each of
       these services might constitute a separate product market.98
(117) In view of the fact that the Transaction leads to affected markets only if the
       market for foreign exchange trading is considered a distinct market, for the
       purpose of this decision, when assessing the impact of the Transaction the
       Commission will focus on this market segment.
4.2.10.2. Geographic market definition
(118) As regard financial market services, in previous cases the Commission has
       considered that most of them are international in scope, but some of them have
       been analyses from a national perspective.99
(119) In view of the fact that the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
       compatibility with the internal market in relation to financial market services
       under any plausible geographic definition, it can be left open whether the market
       is national or wider (at least EEA). The competitive assessment will be based on
       the national scope of the market, since should the geographic scope be wider the
       market would not be affected by the Transaction.
5.    COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
 5.1.  Introduction
(120) The Transaction results in a number of horizontally affected markets in the Baltic
       States. In particular: i) retail loans in Latvia and Lithuania; ii) corporate loans in
       Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania; iii) corporate deposits in Latvia and Lithuania; iv)
       leasing in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania; v) factoring in Latvia and Lithuania; vi)
       documentary credits in Latvia and Lithuania; vii) payment card issuing in
       Lithuania; viii) payments in Lithuania; ix) foreign exchange trading in Lithuania.
(121) No vertical links arise from the Transaction.
(122) Market conditions are fairly similar in nature across the Baltic countries, and the
       main competitive dynamics are comparable in all three countries. The competitive
       assessment will therefore be based on the relevant product market, identifying
       country-based specificities where relevant.
97      COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis.
98      COMP/M.3894 – Unicredito / HVB, COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis.
99      COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis, COMP/M.4155 – BNP Paribas / BNL.
                                                  21


      share of [10-20]%. Several other players will remain present, including Citadele
      with a market share of more than [5-10]% and ABVL with more than [5-10]%
      share.
(126) On the market for housing loans the Notifying Parties’ market shares are slightly
      higher, with the combined market share of [30-40]%, but the overall competitive
      landscape is very similar: Swedbank and SEB will remain important players on
      the market with markets shares of respectively [30-40]% and [10-20]%; the
      largest local bank ABVL will have [5-10]% market share.
(127) Within retail loans in Latvia Nordea seems to be particularly strong on the market
      comprising “other loans” ([30-40]% market share), however DNB is much
      smaller: the increment brought by the Transaction amounts to [0-5]% only, and
      thus the combined share remains below [30-40]%. The market of “other loans” is
      rather small, it totals around EUR 301 million in Latvia which corresponds to
      approximately [5-10]% of the overall retail loans market and thus relatively
      strong position of the merged entity in that segment does not seem to prove that
      Luminor could have any particular competitive advantage over its competitors.
(128) In Lithuania the combined market shares of the Notifying Parties remain below
      [30-40]% on every affected market in the area of retail loans. In retail loans in
      Lithuania DNB is stronger with market share of around [20-30]%, and Nordea
      holds around [10-20]% share. Post-transaction strong competitors will remain
      present on the market, in particular Swedbank which will remain the market
      leader with [30-40]% market share and SEB with almost [20-30]% market share.
      On the market segment for housing loans and the segment for “other loans” in
      Lithuania the competitive landscape is very similar to that on the market for
      overall retail loans: the Notifying Parties combined market share will be around
      [30-40]%, Swedbank will remain the market leader with [30-40]% market share
      on the market for housing loans and SEB the third largest supplier with [30-40]%
      market share on the market for housing loans and [20-30]% share in “other
      loans”.
(129) The Notifying Parties submit that there is healthy competition between
      competitors active on the market for retail loans in both Latvia and Lithuania with
      several strong competitors present.
(130) Furthermore, they submit that the digitalisation of banking and the rise of
      financial technology solutions result in various new retail lending products and
      thus the competition on the market is based on constant qualitative product
      improvement. The Notifying Parties note that while in the past loans could be
      granted only when customers were physically present in the branch, nowadays
      digitalisation has facilitated the electronic issuing of retail loans, and thus reduced
      significantly the barriers to entry into the market related to the need for a branch
      network. Indeed, with an exception of more complex housing loans, customers in
      Latvia and Lithuania can submit and complete a retail loan application online,
      without the need to be present in the branch office at any point during the
      application.
(131) The Notifying Parties submit that in both Latvia and Lithuania the overall number
      of branches has been declining: in Latvia it decreased from 654 branches in 2007
      to 265 in 2016 and in Lithuania from 777 in 2008 to 287 branches in 2016.
      According to the Notifying Parties the decreasing significance of an established
                                                 23

      branch network additionally increases the chances of non-banks to increase their
      presence on the market for retail loans and they submit that there exists a highly
      dynamic and growing non-bank retail lending market, imposing and increasing
      competitive pressure on bank providers.
(132) With regard to the Notifying Parties’ claim that non-banks have an increasingly
      important role on the market for retail loans, the Commission notes that the
      market share data presented above include only the banks' data. While the
      respondents to the market investigation confirmed that non-banks are present on
      the market for retail loans on both Latvia and Lithuania, they also explained that
      non-banks would only offer certain products: typically consumer loans and high
      interest rate loans without collateral; as a consequence they would not exert
      important competitive pressure. Some competitors indicated that non-banks rather
      than competing with banks tend to have a complementary role.102 In any event,
      the market share data for retail loans taking into account the non-banks' activities
      do not change the competitive assessment. Should the non-banks be included the
      Notifying Parties’ market shares would generally be lower by [0-5]%.
(133) In response to the market investigation competitors indicated that suppliers of
      retail loans compete mainly on price, product offering, channels and customer
      service (including the speed of the decision making process as to the granting of
      loans).103
(134) In both countries almost all the respondents to the market investigation consider
      that Swedbank is the strongest supplier of retail loans and SEB is the second
      largest player. In general competitors explained that all the top banks are
      universal banks providing all types of loans and thus the ranking would be similar
      for any particular type of retail loans (e.g. personal loans, consumer credit,
      mortgages).104
(135) As regards the Latvian market for retail loans Nordea was mentioned to be quite
      strong in collateralized lending. Both Nordea and DNB are perceived to have
      rather small branch and ATM networks (in particular when compared to
      Swedbank and SEB). Their strength is seen in the fact that both Nordea and DNB
      have access to funding from their respective parent companies and thus can offer
      lower interest rates.105
(136) In Lithuania on the retail loans market Nordea is perceived as being focused on
      collateralised lending, targeting clients with higher income and a small client base
      with a small branch network. DNB on the other hand is considered to offer
      competing pricing, and to have wide branch network and a rather big client
      base.106 This indicates that DNB and Nordea are not particularly close
      competitors and at least to certain extent have complementary offerings.
(137) This is further reflected in the market investigation replies, as the vast majority of
      respondents to the market investigation consider that both Nordea and DNB
102   Non-confidential replies to question 17 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
103   Non-confidential replies to question 11 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
104   Non-confidential replies to question 12 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
105   Non-confidential replies to question 13 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
106   Non-confidential replies to question 13 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                      24

       compete most closely with Swedbank and SEB, and not with each other.107 For
       both Nordea and DNB Swedbank is perceived to be their closest competitor and
       SEB to be their second closest competitor.
(138) The market participants, both customers and competitors do not expect that the
       Transaction could have any impact on the market for retail loans or any of its
       segments in Latvia or Lithuania.
(139) Furthermore the Commission notes that as regards the retail market, and retail
       loans in particular, retail clients are free to choose their supplier of financial
       services. Competitors explained that retail customers, in particular as regards
       retail loans, typically choose their supplier based on price and contract terms
       offered, according to their specific needs. The market investigation did not reveal
       that customers would encounter any particular difficulties when switching to
       another financial provider, except for the standard penalty fees for early
       repayment of ongoing loan that may apply. As regards new loans there would be
       no obstacles to switching.
(140) In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
       raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in the area of
       retail loans and any of its segments in Lithuania and Latvia.
5.2.2. Corporate loans
(141) The Transaction leads to affected markets for corporate loans in Estonia, Latvia,
       and Lithuania. If the market were to be segmented based on the size of customers
       (LCCs/SMEs), affected markets would also arise in the three Baltic countries. If
       the market for corporate loans to real estate were to be distinguished, the
       Notifying Parties' market shares and their competitors' would not substantially
       differ in any of the Baltic States. Therefore, the competitive assessment provided
       in this section will apply also to this specific market, which will not be further
       discussed.108
(142) In Estonia, as can been seen from table 2 below, the Notifying Parties' combined
       market shares (2016) are less than [20-30]% both on the overall market for
       corporate loans and the markets for corporate loans to LCCs and to SMEs.
       Moreover, the increment brought by the Transaction is moderate ([0-5]% for the
       overall market; [0-5]% for the LCCs segment; [5-10]% for the SMEs segment). In
       all markets post-Transaction the merged entity will face strong competition from
       Swedbank, which remains the market leader by a considerable margin, and SEB
       (with market shares close to [20-30]%). Post-Transaction, beyond the three main
       players, a number of other competitors will remain present, including Danske and
       LHV (which hold individual market shares above [5-10]%).109
107    Non-confidential replies to questions 15 and 16 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
108    In addition Nordea will retain a certain portfolio of corporate loans ("the carve-out loans
       portfolio") which will be […] post-Transaction […]. In relation to the "carve-out loans portfolio",
       […]. Thus, Nordea will have no direct presence in the Baltic countries stemming from the carve-
       out portfolio.
109    No substantial changes in market shares have occurred with respect to 2014 and 2015.
                                                      25




        very strong players (Swedbank will often remain the market leader), and other
        relatively smaller competitors able to exercise a credible competitive pressure.
(150) The market investigation confirmed that the Notifying Parties are not considered
        to be the strongest players on the market for corporate loans in the Baltic
        countries. In all three countries Swedbank and SEB are considered to be the main
        players and in general the market investigation results show that DNB and Nordea
        do not have more influence on the market than their market shares would
        suggest.112 This indicates that the Transaction will not result in the removal of
        significant competitive force from the market.
(151) In addition, the Notifying Parties are considered to compete more closely with
        other market players, rather than with each other in all Baltic States. The majority
        of respondents to the market investigation have identified either Swedbank or
        SEB as the closest competitors to both Nordea and DNB.113
(152) Moreover, the vast majority of customers have confirmed that in all three Baltic
        countries there is sufficient choice of financial service providers able to serve
        their needs in relation to the provision of financial services, including corporate
        loans, and that enough alternatives will remain post-Transaction.114
(153) The majority of customers responding to the market investigation in the three
        Baltic countries explained that are no particular hurdles that would prevent them
        from switching to other financial service providers for corporate loans. Some
        customers do mention that for ongoing loans early termination fees (which in
        many instances are not significant) may apply depending on the terms of the
        contracts, but no such penalties apply when switching provider for new loans. In
        general, switching is considered to be relatively easy in terms of time and costs
        associated to it.115
(154) In general, the majority of customers and competitors do not expect any negative
        impact to arise from the Transaction in relation to the market for corporate loans
        in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.116
(155) In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
        raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market with respect to
        the market for corporate loans in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
5.2.2.1. Financing to public authorities
(156) The Notifying Parties' market shares on the affected markets for the financing to
        public authorities in Latvia and Lithuania are presented in tables 5 and 6 below.
        No affected market will arise in Estonia.
112     Non-confidential replies to question 35 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
113     Non-confidential replies to questions 25, 26 and 27 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers, and to
        questions 37 and 38 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
114     Non-confidential replies to questions 16, 17, 18 and 29 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
115     Non-confidential replies to question 20 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
116     Non-confidential replies to question 31 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers, and to question 110
        of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                        29


(157) First of all, the Commission notes the high volatility of the market for the
      financing of public authorities both in Latvia and Lithuania.
(158) In Latvia, the Notifying Parties' combined market shares reach almost [30-40]%
      (2016) with an increment brought by the Transaction of about [5-10]%. The
      Parties' combined market shares have increased by almost [20-30]% from 2014 to
      2016, due to a sharp increase in Nordea's market shares and a relevant decrease in
      DNB's market shares. In particular, the Notifying Parties submit that the sharp
      increment in Nordea's shares from [10-20]% in 2015 to [30-40]% in 2016 is the
      result of a single loan of almost […] EURM. The Notifying Parties were not able
      to provide a complete picture of all players active on the market, but submit that a
      number of competitors (including two main banking players, Swedbank and SEB)
      will be present on the market post-Transaction.
(159) In Lithuania, the Notifying Parties' combined market shares reach almost [30-
      40]% (2016), with an increment brought by the Transaction of about [5-10]%.
      Also in this case, the market is very volatile. For example, Swedbank's market
      shares were above than [40-50]% in 2014, while only slightly above [10-20]% in
      2016. In relation to Lithuania the Notifying Parties were able to provide a more
      complete picture of the players active on the market, from which can be observed
      that post-Transaction there will remain a significant number of competitors able
      to provide financing to public authorities, including Swedbank, OP, AB Šiauliu,
      SEB, and Danske.
(160) The Notifying Parties explain that the high volatility of the markets is due to the
      strong competition that occurs in such markets. Public authorities generally
      source loans through tenders, thus winning or losing even one competition may
      substantially affect market shares.
(161) As indicated more in general in relation to the markets for corporate banking, the
      Notifying Parties are not considered to be the closest competitors, since they
      appear to compete more closely with the other two main banks (SEB and
      Swedbank), rather than between themselves.118 Moreover, no relevant strengths in
      the area of financing of public authorities emerged in the context of the market
      investigation in relation to neither Nordea nor DNB.119
(162) The vast majority of competitors that responded to the market investigation
      explained that they do provide loans to public authorities in the Baltic States in
      which they are active, and they do so with respect to different levels of
      government. Competitors also explained that there would not be any significant
      barriers for players active in the provision of corporate loans to start providing
      loans to public authorities given that product offered are generally the same.120
      Therefore, a number of strong competitors, actual and potential, will remain post-
      Transaction both in Latvia and Lithuania.
118   Non-confidential replies to questions 37 and 38 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors, and to
      questions 26 and 27 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
119   Non-confidential replies to question 39 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors, and to questions
      23 and 24 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
120   Non-confidential replies to question 32 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                      31



      SMEs in Latvia, are not in themselves a strong indication of likely competition
      concerns.
(171) As explained above, in Latvia post-Transaction the Notifying Parties will keep
      facing strong competition from Swedbank, Citadele, and SEB. In Lithuania, the
      merged entity will reach the size of its two main competitors, Swedbank and
      SEB, which will exercise a strong competitive pressure. In addition, other players
      will be operating on the market. This is true both for the overall market of
      corporate deposits and its potential segments of corporate deposits to LCCs and
      SMEs.
(172) The market investigation confirmed that the Notifying Parties are not considered
      to be particularly strong players on the market for corporate deposits neither in
      Latvia nor Lithuania. In Latvia, the vast majority of respondents have identified
      Swedbank as the strongest player on the market, followed by either Citadele or
      SEB. In Lithuania, nearly all respondents have identified Swedbank and SEB as
      the top two players on the market for corporate deposits. In general the market
      investigation results show that the Parties do not have more influence on the
      competition than their market shares would suggest.126
(173) Moreover, competitors have explained that companies do not specialise in
      particular types of products or clients (e.g. LCCs and SMEs) and that the
      Notifying Parties' positioning (and their competitors') tend not to change based on
      such criteria. Therefore, the Notifying Parties are not considered to be top players
      neither in relation to corporate loans to LCCs nor to SMEs.
(174) In addition, as for the market of corporate loans, the Notifying Parties are
      considered to compete more closely with other market players, rather than with
      each other. The majority of respondents to the market investigation have
      identified either Swedbank or SEB as the closest competitors to both Nordea and
      DNB (Swedbank was identified as the closest competitor to the Notifying Parties
      rather more frequently in relation to Latvia, while SEB was mentioned relatively
      more often in relation to Lithuania).127
(175) Moreover, the majority of customers have confirmed that post-Transaction, both
      in Latvia and Lithuania, there will be sufficient choice of providers for corporate
      deposits. Given the relatively small size of the markets concerned, the presence of
      three strong competitors and a number of other mid-sized players is considered
      sufficient.128
(176) The majority of customers responding to the market investigation in the three
      Baltic countries explained that are no particular hurdles that would prevent them
      from switching to other financial service providers for corporate deposits. In
      general, switching is considered to be relatively easy in terms of time and costs
      associated to it.129
126   Non-confidential replies to question 35 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
127   Non-confidential replies to questions 25, 26 and 27 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers, and to
      questions 37 and 38 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
128   Non-confidential replies to question 29 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
129   Non-confidential replies to question 20 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
                                                      34




      pressure on the market. Similarly if the market is segmented according to the size
      of customers.
(186) The Notifying Parties' combined market share would be the highest and would
      amount to [40-50]% on the market for financial leasing granted to large
      customers, related to cars only. Under any other framework (overall financial
      leasing, overall car leasing or any type of leasing granted to large customers) the
      combined market shares are lower. The market size for financial leasing granted
      to large customer related to cars only amounted in 2016 to EUR 24 million in
      terms of total assets covered, or 1% of the overall leasing market in Lithuania.
      The Commission notes that with small market sizes, individual contracts can
      represent a significant portion of the market and therefore a limited number of
      contracts can affect market shares without providing a clear picture of the
      competitive situation. Additionally, if a narrow market definition were to be
      retained, it should first be noted that most competitors who offer leasing services
      provide both operational and financial leasing and indicate that it would be easy
      for a company such as theirs to start offering other types of leasing.135 Second, a
      majority of competitors indicate they offer leasing services to all categories of
      customers.136 Therefore it would be relatively easy for competitors with relatively
      small market share to leverage their presence in the neighbouring leasing markets
      and increase their offer in the market for operational leasing for large corporate
      customers. In any event even on such a narrowly defined market strong
      competitors will remain present, in particular SEB with [20-30]%, Swedbank with
      [10-20]% and UniCredit with [5-10]% market share.
(187) In response to the market investigation customers indicated that there is sufficient
      choice of suppliers of leasing in general and they have not indicated that the
      choice would be limited in any particular segment or type of leasing in any of the
      three countries.137
(188) Some competitors indicated the Nordea specialises in white label leasing, but as
      explained in Section 4.2.5 above they have also confirmed that any supplier of
      leasing services would be able to offer white label leasing. Furthermore, it is
      noted that the Commission does not consider the white label leasing market to
      constitute a plausible distinct product market for reasons explained in Section
      4.2.5. In general competitors indicated that all major leasing suppliers provide
      offers for all type of customers and for all type of assets. As regards closeness of
      competition, the market investigation did not indicate any reason to consider
      Nordea and DNB as close competitors in the area of white label leasing (which is
      not a distinct product market, as regards the relevant leasing markets), other than
      the fact that the two banks have white label leasing contracts in place. To the
      contrary, the market investigation indicated that all banks offering leasing
      contracts would be able to offer also white label leasing contracts. On the
135   Non-confidential replies to questions 72, 73 and 78 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors. For
      example: “We see here no obstructions in switching from one leasing type offering to another
      (and vice versa).”
136   Non-confidential replies to question 76 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors. As explained by
      one competitor: “Offering as such does not differ between LCC and SME segments, although
      particular conditions and pricing on the transaction depends on individual factors: financial
      performance, general relationship, experience, etc.”
137   Non-confidential replies to questions 16, 17 and 18 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
                                                     38

       demand-side, customers who currently have a white label leasing contracts in
       place have also indicated that there would not encounter any particular hurdles if
       they wanted to switch to another supplier of leasing products, also to those
       suppliers who currently do not have white label leasing contracts in place.138
(189) Therefore, on the leasing markets Nordea seems to compete mainly with SEB,
       Swedbank and, to a lesser extent to DNB. When asked about suppliers which
       could be considered closest to DNB, competitors list SEB, Swedbank and Nordea.
       Overall the market investigation results show that Nordea and DNB are not closer
       to each other than they are to SEB or Swedbank in any of the three Baltic
       countries.
(190) Customers who responded to the market investigation consider that Nordea
       together with SEB and Swedbank are among the top three suppliers of leasing in
       each of the three countries.139 Customers, even more than competitors, seem to
       consider that Swedbank and SEB are the two most important suppliers of leasing
       in each of the three countries; they indicate that in leasing both to Nordea and to
       DNB Swedbank and SEB are the closest competitors.140
(191) The vast majority of customers do not expect that the Transaction could have any
       impact on the leasing market.141
(192) In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
       raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market in the area of
       leasing or any of its segments in Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia.
5.2.5. Factoring
(193) The market shares for the market for factoring, as well as the relevant sub-
       markets, are presented below. DNB is not active on this market in Estonia,
       therefore there are no overlaps between the Notifying Parties' activities in that
       country. In addition DNB is not active in reverse factoring in Latvia and has not
       had any sales in reverse factoring in Lithuania over the last three years, therefore
       there are no overlaps between the Notifying Parties' activities in this potential
       sub-market.
138    Non-confidential replies to question 20 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
139    Non-confidential replies to questions 16, 17 and 18 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
140    Non-confidential replies to questions 25, 26 and 27 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
141    Non-confidential replies to questions 29, 30 and 31 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
                                                       39


(195) As for Latvia the Notifying Parties submit that the merged entity would face
      strong competition, notably from Swedbank who would be the clear market leader
      in the overall factoring market and all its possible sub-segments.
(196) In Latvia the merged entity would be the second biggest player on the market for
      factoring markets with the market share of approximately [30-40]% in all
      factoring markets, following the market leader, by a considerable margin,
      Swedbank whose share amounts to around [50-60]% on each factoring market in
      Latvia. SEB will become the third largest supplier of factoring with market shares
      around [10-20]%. Furthermore, the increment deriving from the Transaction is
      not significant ([5-10]% depending on the segment, brought by DNB).
(197) Lithuania DNB is a relatively small market player whereas Nordea's market share
      is more important. Post-transaction the market share of the merged entity will at
      most reach [30-40]%, while the increment deriving from the Transaction amounts
      to around [0-5]% for factoring without insurance, [5-10]% in factoring with
      insurance and around [5-10]% in overall factoring. The merged entity will
      continue to face strong competitors, in particular Swedbank (with the market
      share exceeding [20-30]%) and SEB (with the market share exceeding [30-40]%)
      as well as few smaller suppliers, namely Citadele, Danske and Šiauliu.
(198) The market investigation results reveal that in Latvia most customers do not
      consider DNB and Nordea to be particularly close competitors.142 Swedbank and
      SEB are most frequently mentioned as each of the Notifying Parties' closest
      competitors. A customer explains that "SEB Banka AS and Swedbank AS are the
      largest banks in Latvia, which offer a wide range of financial services."143
      Another customer indicates as the closest competitors "SEB for Nordea and
      Swedbank for DNB because of the similar approach to the customers."144
(199) Customers and competitors of DNB and Nordea in Lithuania do not consider
      them to be particularly close competitors.145 The results of the market
      investigation do not provide conclusive results as to which competitors would be
      DNB and Nordea's closest competitors, although on balance it would be rather
      Swedbank and SEB. In this regard a customer explained that "SEB and Swedbank
      are ones of the biggest banks in Lithuania and they can provide all banking
      services with good prices and high quality".146 Finally, customers consider that
      the Transaction will not have any negative impact on them or on competition in
      general on the markets for factoring.147 This is also true of the Notifying Parties'
      competitors.148
(200) In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
      raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market with respect to
      factoring.
142   Non-confidential replies to question 26 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
143   Non-confidential reply to question 26 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
144   Non-confidential replies to question 26 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
145   Non-confidential replies to question 27 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers, and to questions 65
      and 66 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
146   Non-confidential replies to question 27 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
147   Non-confidential replies to questions 29 and 30 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
148   Non-confidential replies to question 110 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                      41

5.2.6. Documentary credits
(201) The Transaction leads to affected markets for documentary credits in Latvia and
       Lithuania.149 As explained in section 4.2.7.1, the exact scope of the product
       market can be left open. Given the fact that the Notifying Parties reach higher
       market shares when the market for documentary credits is segmented based on the
       product offered (guarantees, letters of credit and documentary collection) and the
       size of clients (LCCs/SMEs), the competitive assessment will discuss the effects
       of the Transaction on the basis of the narrowest markets.
(202) The affected markets in Latvia and Lithuania are presented in tables 14 and 15
       below.
(203) In Latvia, the Transaction leads to an affected market in relation to guarantees
       (both to LCCs and to SMEs) and to documentary collections to SMEs. Regarding
       the market for guarantees, the Notifying Parties' combined shares are about [40-
       50]% for guarantees provided to LCCs and about [20-30]% for guarantees
       provided to SMEs. The increment brought by the Transaction is more significant
       on the market for guarantees to LCCs (around [10-20]%) than on the market for
       guarantees to SMEs (around [5-10]%). Post-Transaction, the merged entity will
       remain the market leader on the market for guarantees to LCCs and the second
       largest player in relation to SMEs, following SEB (market share around [30-
       40]%). In both cases, Swedbank and SEB will remain significant competitors and
       a number of other smaller players (which collectively hold about one fourth of the
       market) will be present. Regarding the market for documentary collection to
       SMEs, the Notifying Parties' combined shares remain less than [30-40]%, with a
       small increment brought by the Transaction (less than [0-5]%). The merged entity
       will remain the market leader, followed by significant competitors such as
       Swedbank, SEB and ABVL (with individual market shares between [10-20]%
       and [10-20]%) and other smaller players, including Citadele.
149    In Estonia the Notifying Parties' activities overlap only in relation to guarantees since DNB does
       not provide letters of credit and documentary collection. Technically, this overlap gives rise to an
       affected market in relation to guarantees provided to LCCs and to guarantees provided to SMEs.
       However, the Notifying Parties' combined market shares on the two markets are only slightly
       above [20-30]%, while the increment brought by the Transaction is less than [0-5]%. In addition,
       if guarantees provided by non-banks are included in the calculation of market shares, no affected
       market will arise from the Transaction. Given all these elements, the market for documentary
       credits in Estonia will not be treated as an affected market and thus will not be further discussed.
                                                         42



      to LCCs and SMEs. In Lithuania, their combined share on the overall market for
      guarantees and its LCCs/SMEs segments would be around [20-30]%.
(207) Many competitors responding to the market investigation confirmed that in the
      Baltic countries non-bank players, and in particular insurance companies, are
      active in the provision of guarantees comparable to those offered by banks. For
      example, one competitor explains that "Insurance companies are major
      competitor[s] to the banks in local guarantee (sureties) market." 153
(208) The Commissions notes that, based on the data provided by the Notifying Parties,
      non-banks are important players on the market for guarantees in Latvia and
      Lithuania and account for, respectively, one third and half of the total markets. If
      their activities are considered to the part of the market for guarantees, the
      Notifying Parties' market shares would substantially drop to a level (about [20-
      30]% in Latvia and [20-30]% in Lithuania) for which no indication of likely
      competition concerns arise. Without concluding on the actual role of non-banks
      on the market for guarantees, the Commission notes that these players will exert
      some competitive pressure on this market and thus will constrain both the merged
      entity as well as other banks.
(209) In any event, post-Transaction the other two main banks (Swedbank and SEB)
      will remain strong players in the markets for guarantees to LCCs and to SMEs in
      both Latvia and Lithuania, and other smaller banks will remain present. The vast
      majority of customers believe that there is a sufficient choice of providers able to
      serve their needs for documentary credits instruments, including guarantees, in
      both Latvia and Lithuania.154 No indications that this will change post-
      Transaction emerged in the context of the market investigation.155
(210) In relation to the markets for documentary collections to SMEs in Latvia and
      letters of credits to SMEs in Lithuania, as explained above, the Commission notes
      that the Notifying Parties' combined market shares will remain below [30-40]%
      with a very small increment brought by the Transaction (less than [0-5]%) and
      that a number of other competitors will remain on the market.
(211) The results of the market investigation showed that the Notifying Parties' position
      on the markets related to documentary credits is not as strong as their market
      shares (excluding non-banks providers for guarantees) would suggest. In fact,
      while the Notifying Parties' have been generally recognised as among top five
      competitors in the provision of documentary credits in Latvia and Lithuania,
      neither DNB or Nordea was mentioned as the top player on the market (or its
      potential segments) by a majority of respondents (as would be suggested by
      Nordea's market shares, in particular).156
(212) Moreover, many competitors responding to the market investigation explained
      that all banks generally provide different types of documentary credit instruments
      to large, medium and small clients in the Baltic countries. As one competitor
      explained: "All companies are servicing all documentary credit instruments and
153   Non-confidential replies to question 55 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
154   Non-confidential replies to questions 17 and 18 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
155   Non-confidential replies to questions 31 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
156   Non-confidential replies to questions 17 and 18 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
                                                      45

       all types of customers." "All competitors provide similar services to both
       segments [LCCs and SMEs]."157 In general, competitors believe that price is the
       main characteristic that drives competition and that the competitive pressure on
       the market is strong.158
(213) The market investigation also revealed that, similarly to other markets, the
       Notifying Parties are considered to compete more closely with other top banks
       (namely Swedbank and SEB) than between themselves. The majority of
       customers and competitors responding to the market investigation have in fact
       identified either Swedbank or SEB as the closest competitor to the Notifying
       Parties for the market documentary credits and its segments in both Latvia and
       Lithuania.159
(214) The majority of customers responding to the market investigation explained that
       switching providers for documentary credits (including guarantees, letters of
       credits and credit collections) is feasible and relatively easy in terms of time and
       costs.160 As explained above, all banks active in the Baltic States generally
       provide different types of documentary credit instruments, and thus would be able
       to serve potential switching customers.161
(215) In general, the vast majority of customers and competitors responding to the
       market investigation do not expect any negative impact to arise from the
       Transaction in relation to the markets for documentary credits in Latvia and
       Lithuania.162
(216) In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
       raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market with respect to
       the markets for documentary credits in Latvia and Lithuania.
5.2.7. Payment card issuing
(217) The market shares for the market for payment card issuing, as well as the relevant
       sub-markets, are presented in tables 16 and 17 below. The Transaction does not
       lead to affected markets in any of the Baltic countries on the overall markets for
       payment card issuing. There would only be affected markets in Lithuania on the
       potential markets for (i) credit cards overall, (ii) retail credit cards, (iii) corporate
       cards overall iv) corporate debit cards, and (v) corporate credit cards.
157    Non-confidential replies to question 50 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
158    Non-confidential replies to question 49 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
159    Non-confidential replies to questions 26 and 27 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers, and to
       questions 52 and 53 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
160    Non-confidential replies to question 20 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
161    Non-confidential replies to question 50 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
162    Non-confidential replies to question 31 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers, and to question 110
       of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                       46


(218) On the market for credit cards overall and retail credit cards the Transaction does
       not lead to high market shares of the merged entity: respectively [20-30]% and
       [20-30]%, with the increment deriving from the Transaction of around [5-10]% in
       both cases, brought by Nordea. Swedbank will remain the market leader with the
       market share of more than [40-50]% on the overall market for credit cards and in
       its retail segment. Other competitors, such as Citadele, Danske and Šiauliu will
       remain present on the market.
(219) The Notifying Parties argue that Nordea and DNB are not close competitors in the
       market for payment cards issuing in Lithuania. The Parties also submit that their
       main competitors in all markets are the two largest players: SEB and Swedbank.
       The Notifying Parties also argue that other banks, such as Citadele, Danske and
       Šiauliu, will continue to offer competing card services and exert additional
       competitive pressure on the market.
(220) In the markets for cards for corporate customers (overall, credit and debit) the
       market structure is very similar: the merged entity will have the market share of
       around [30-40]%, with a small increment brought by the Transaction of less than
       [0-5]%. Swedbank would remain the market on the overall market for corporate
       cards and for corporate debit cards with market shares of more than 30%. On all
       three corporate card markets SEB will have a market share of almost [30-40]%.
(221) The merged entity will be the market leader only on the market for corporate
       credit cards (building on DNB's already leading position), although in this
       segment, as already mentioned, the increment brought by the transaction is small.
       Furthermore, there are more players present with significant market shares:
       Citadele, Danske and Šiauliu.
(222) Most costumers explained that there are no particular obstacles in switching their
       provider for payment card issuing services, and that time and costs associated to a
       potential change are in general not significant.165 As explained above, a number
       of competitors active on the market would be able to serve customers, should they
       wish to switch.
(223) Finally, in general both customers and competitors consider that the Transaction
       will not have any negative impact on them or on competition in general on the
       markets for payment card issuing in Lithuania.166
(224) In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
       raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market with respect to
       payment card issuing.
5.2.8. Payments
(225) The market for payments is affected by the Transaction only in Lithuania. In
       Latvia and Estonia the market shares of the merged entity on the markets for
       payments and any of its plausible segments remain below 20%.
165    Non-confidential replies to question 20 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
166    Non-confidential replies to questions 29 and 30 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers. Non-
       confidential replies to question 110 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                        48



(234) Moreover the Commission notes that changes in market shares are not
      proportional to changes in turnover. For example, DNB market shares have
      decreased by [0-5] percentage points between 2015 and 2016 despite very little
      variation in turnover. This is mainly due to the significant growth of the market
      (from about 8 billion in 2015 to about 15 billion in 2016).
(235) The Notifying Parties' combined market shares remain below [30-40]% post-
      Transaction, with a small increment (about [5-10]%) brought by the Transaction.
      Based on the 2016 data, the merged entity will become the market leader.
      However, it will continue to face strong competition from SEB (market share of
      about [30-40]%) and Swedbank (about [20-30]%). Moreover, a number of
      relatively smaller players will remain on the market, including Šiauliu, Danske,
      OP and Citadele; most of which have increased their market shares over the past
      three years.170
(236) The market investigation results reveal that the majority of customers do not
      consider the Notifying Parties to be the closest competitors; they rather believe
      they both compete more closely with other financial services providers (in
      particular SEB was mentioned more frequently as the closest competitor to both
      DNB and Nordea).171
(237) Most costumers explained that there are no particular obstacles in switching their
      provider for foreign exchange trading services, and that time and costs associated
      to a potential change are in general not significant.172 As explained above, a
      number of competitors active on the market would be able to serve customers,
      should they wish to switch.
(238) Moreover, the market investigation results show that in general customers
      consider that there is a sufficient choice of financial service providers on this
      market and they believe the Transaction will not have any negative impact in this
      respect.173 In addition, most competitors also do not expect that the Transaction
      could have any negative impact in particular on the market for foreign exchange
      trading.174
(239) In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
      raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market with respect to
      the market for foreign exchange trading in Lithuania.
 5.3. Article 2(4) assessment (spill-over effects)
(240) Under Article 2(4) of the Merger Regulation, to the extent that the creation of a
      JV that constitutes a concentration pursuant to Article 3 has as its object or effect
      the coordination of the competitive behaviour of undertakings that remain
      independent, the Commission must assess such coordination in accordance with
      the criteria of Article 101(1) and (3) TFEU, with a view of establishing whether
      or not the operation is compatible with the common market.
170   Market shares of Šiauliu have decreased from around [5-10]% to [5-10]%.
171   Non-confidential replies to question 27 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
172   Non-confidential replies to question 20 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
173   Non-confidential replies to questions 18 and 30 of the questionnaire Q2 to customers.
174   Non-confidential replies to question 110 of the questionnaire Q1 to competitors.
                                                      51

(241) In making this assessment, the Commission must take into account, in particular,
      whether two or more parent companies retain, to a significant extent, activities in
      the same market as the joint venture or in a market that is downstream or
      upstream from that of the joint venture or in a neighbouring market closely
      related to this market. In addition, the Commission has to take into account
      whether the coordination which is the direct consequence of the creation of the
      joint venture affords the undertakings concerned the possibility of eliminating
      competition in respect of a substantial part of the products or services in question.
      A restriction of competition under Article 101(1) TFEU is established when the
      coordination of the parent companies' competitive behaviour is likely and
      appreciable and results from the creation of the joint venture.175
(242) The Notifying Parties submit that neither Nordea nor DNB will have any
      remaining activities in the same product market as Luminor in the Baltic region,
      with the exception of [description of a portfolio of derivatives agreements].176
      […]. Nordea will service the legacy portfolio of derivatives agreements until
      maturity, but it will not enter into new derivatives transaction. This is confirmed
      also in the Shareholders' Agreement, according to which […].
(243) In view if the above the Commission considers that the potential spill-over effects
      for the Transaction could not lead to any competition concerns.
 5.4. Coordinated effects
(244) According to the Commission's Guidelines on the assessment of horizontal
      mergers,177 a merger in a concentrated market may significantly impede effective
      competition, through the creation or the strengthening of a collective dominance
      position, because it increases the likelihood that firms are able to coordinate their
      behaviour in this way and raise prices. Coordination is considered to be more
      likely to emerge in markets where it is relatively simple to reach a common
      understanding on the terms of coordination (such as keeping prices above
      competitive level, limiting production or by dividing the market) and where the
      economic environment is less complex and more stable. According to the
      Guidelines on horizontal mergers three conditions are necessary for coordination
      to be sustainable: ability to monitor competitors’ behaviour, existence of a
      deterrent mechanism which could be activated if deviation is detected and current
      and future competitors not participating in the coordination, as well as customers,
      should not be able to jeopardise the results expected from the coordination.
(245) The Commission considers that in the present case the above conditions are not
      met, and thus the Transaction will not result in the creation or strengthening of
      coordination leading to significant impediment of effective competition on any of
      the markets concerned by the Transaction. The Commission considers so for the
      following reasons.
175   Merger Regulation, Article 2(5).
176   In addition Nordea will retain a portfolio of corporate loans, […], see details in Section 5.2.2
      regarding corporate loans.
177   Guidelines on the assessment of horizontal mergers under the Council Regulation on the control
      of concentrations between undertakings (OJ C 31, 05.02.2004, paragraph 39), “Guidelines on
      horizontal mergers”.
                                                    52

(246) First, all the main players in the markets concerned are universal banks in general
      providing all the banking products to all categories of customers […]178 and in the
      present case the market investigation has not revealed any indication or evidence
      that coordinated effects currently take place on any of the markets discussed in
      the present decision.
(247) Second, while the Transaction inevitably reduces the number of competitors in
      each of the affected markets analysed above, which in some cases results in
      markets with three top players with comparable market shares, on all these
      markets smaller competitors will remain active and they will be able to challenge
      any attempts of coordination between the top three suppliers.
(248) Third, the Commission notes that a symmetric distribution of market shares is not
      seen on all the banking markets concerned by the Transaction. Post-Transaction
      many relevant product markets will have an asymmetric market structure with
      one market leader (either the merged entity or Swedbank) and the remaining
      market players with smaller market shares.
(249) Fourth, the fact that both customers and competitors submit that the banking
      markets are competitive in the three Baltic countries and switching is perceived as
      easy, also to smaller suppliers of banking product, coordination among the top
      three competitors would be difficult.
(250) In general, the results of the market investigation did not raise any concerns about
      potential coordinated effects.
(251) In view of the above, the Commission concludes that the Transaction does not
      lead to coordinated effects which could significantly impede effective
      competition in any of the affected markets.
6.   CONCLUSION
(252) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
      notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with
      the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of
      the Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
178   Should read "First, all the main players in the markets concerned are universal banks in general
      providing all the banking products to all categories of customers and in the present case the market
      investigation has not revealed any indication or evidence that coordinated effects currently take
      place on any of the markets discussed in the present decision."
                                                      53

   For the Commission
   (Signed)
   Margrethe VESTAGER
   Member of the Commission
54
