                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 8.8.2017
In the published version of this decision, some
information has been omitted pursuant to Article                 C(2017) 5661 final
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                        PUBLIC VERSION
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.                                             To the notifying parties:
Subject:            Case M.8460- PEUGEOT / BNP PARIBAS / OPEL VAUXHALL
                    FINCOS
                    Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council
                    Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the
                    European Economic Area2
Dear Sir or Madam,
(1)         On 4 July 2017, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
            concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which the
            undertakings Peugeot S.A. ("PSA", France) and BNP Paribas ("BNPP", France)
            acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation joint
            control of General Motor's European financial subsidiaries and branches (the
            "Fincos") by way of a purchase of shares (the "Transaction").3 PSA and BNPP
            are referred hereinafter as the "Notifying Parties", while PSA, BNPP and the
            Fincos are together referred to as the "Parties".
1.        THE PARTIES
(2)         PSA, a publicly listed company headquartered in France, is active worldwide in
            the development, manufacturing and distribution of automotive vehicles under
            three brands - Peugeot, Citroën and DS. Through its wholly owned subsidiary
            Banque PSA Finance ("BPF"), it offers loans and leases for the purchase of
            PSA-branded vehicles and loans to PSA car dealers.
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
      the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
      replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
      the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2     OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
3     Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C223 du 12/07/2017, page 4.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

(3)      BNPP, a publicly listed company headquartered in France, is active worldwide
         in the retail banking and services as well as in the corporate and institutional
         banking sector. Through its wholly owned subsidiary BNPP Paribas Personal
         Finance, it offers a full range of personal credit products at points of sale, car
         dealerships and directly to consumers as well as insurance and savings offers in
         some countries.
(4)      The Fincos including 23 entities in France, Germany, Italy, the United
         Kingdom, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland, together constitute
         the financing business of Opel and Vauxhall and offer automotive financing
         solutions and related services, mainly to car dealers and customers of
         Opel/Vauxhall-branded vehicles.
2.     THE OPERATION
         The Transaction
(5)      The Transaction is linked to the broader acquisition by PSA of the automotive
         business of Opel/Vauxhall from General Motors ("GM").4 According to the
         Notifying Parties, the Transaction will enable PSA to continue offering financial
         solutions to purchasers of Opel/Vauxhall-branded motor vehicles. It will also
         allow BNPP to expand its consumer finance business in Europe by growing its
         footprint on the automotive financing business.
         Joint control
(6)      On 5 March 2017, PSA, through its wholly owned subsidiary BPF, and BNPP,
         through its wholly owned subsidiary BNPP Personal Finance, entered into a
         framework agreement setting out the terms and conditions of the Transaction
         (the "Framework Agreement").
(7)      Under the Framework Agreement, the Transaction will be implemented by the
         Notifying Parties acquiring joint control over the Fincos via share acquisitions.
         More specifically, the Notifying Parties will acquire the Fincos through a jointly
         owned entity, such entity being held equally by each of the parent company with
         equal voting rights and board representation.
(8)      Both PSA and BNPP will have equal representation on the Fincos' Board.5 The
         following "reserved matters", among others, will require a Board decision: (i)
         approval of [item related to internal organisation], (ii) approval of [item related
         to internal organisation], (iii) approval of [item related to internal organisation],
         (iv) [item related to internal organisation], and (v) decisions involving […].
         Most decisions require unanimity while a limited number of decisions only
4   See Case M.8449 – Peugeot/Opel, declared compatible with the internal market by the Commission
    on 5 July 2017. The two transactions constitute separate concentrations and were therefore notified
    and reviewed by the Commission separately.
5   Pursuant to paragraph 7.2 of the Framework Agreement, "[t]he Board will be composed of [range of
    numbers] members and shall have at all times an equal number of members appointed by BNP
    Paribas PF and PSA."
                                                      2

           require a simple majority, typically with one party holding a casting vote,
           depending on the matter.6
(9)        In light of these factors, the Commission considers that PSA (via its subsidiary
           BPF) and BNPP (via its subsidiary BNPP Personal Finance) will acquire joint
           control over the Fincos.
(10)       The notified operation therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning
           of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
3.       EU DIMENSION
(11)       The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
           more than EUR 5 000 million7 [PSA: EUR 54,030 million, BNPP:
           EUR […] million and the Fincos: EUR […] million]. Each of them has an EU-
           wide turnover in excess of EUR 250 million [PSA: EUR […] million, BNPP:
           EUR […] million and the Fincos: EUR […] million], but they do not achieve
           more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the
           same Member State.
(12)       The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of
           the Merger Regulation.
4.       ASSESSMENT
(13)       Based on the information submitted by the Notifying Parties, the Transaction
           gives rise to three horizontally affected markets:
                a. the market for motor vehicle lending in Belgium;
                b. the market for motor vehicle lending in Luxembourg, and
                c. the market for lending services to small and medium-sized enterprises
                     ("SMEs") in Belgium.8
(14)       If only non-captive sales are taken into account, a fourth horizontally affected
           market arises, namely the market for motor vehicle lending in Italy.
6    […]* will have a casting vote on matters related to [items related to internal organisation and
     strategy]; while PSA will have a casting vote on matters related to [items related to internal
     organisation and strategy].
     *Should read "BNPP".
7    Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
     Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
8    These three markets are horizontally affected whether an overall market (including captive and non-
     captive sales) or a market limited to non-captive sales is taken into account; see recitals 16 and 32-33.
                                                          3

  4.1. Relevant markets
4.1.1. Automotive financing services - motor vehicle lending
4.1.1.1. Product market definition
(15)      In previous cases, the Commission considered that, within retail banking,
          consumer credit could constitute a distinct market.9 The Commission also
          considered that consumer credit for the purchase of motor vehicles (including
          lending) and consumer credit offered for the purchase of other consumer goods
          could possibly constitute separate markets.10 Finally, within a market for
          automotive financing services the Commission has further considered a sub-
          segmentation into (i) the markets for motor vehicle lending and (ii) leasing
          services for motor vehicles.11
(16)      In relation to motor vehicle lending, the Commission has previously considered
          a market for motor vehicle lending limited to non-captive activities (the
          "merchant market"). This would exclude captive activities, i.e. the financing
          services offered by car manufacturers' financing subsidiaries to customers who
          purchase a vehicle of their own car brand.12 Ultimately, the Commission left the
          precise product market definition open. In any event, for the purposes of the
          present decision, the exact product market definition for automotive financing
          services can be left open as the Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to
          its compatibility with the internal market under any plausible market definition.
4.1.1.2. Geographic market definition
(17)      In previous cases, the Commission considered the geographic market for retail
          banking services, including consumer credit, to be national in scope.13 The
          Commission also found the geographic market for automotive financing services
          (and possible sub-segments motor vehicle lending and leasing services for motor
          vehicles) to be national in scope.14
(18)      In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact geographic
          market definition for automotive financing services can be left open as the
          Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
          market under any plausible market definition.
9    See e.g. Case M.3067 – Intesa/Capitalia/IMI.
10   See e.g. Case M.3067 – Intesa/Capitalia/IMI.
11   See Case M.4420 – Crédit Agricole/Fiat Auto/FAFS, paragraph 13, Case M.3067 -
     Intesa/Capitalia/IMI, paragraph 35 and Case M.1370 - Peugeot/Credipar, paragraph 5.
12   See Case M.3067 – Intesa/Capitalia/IMI.
13   See e.g. Case M.4420 - Crédit Agricole/Fiat Auto/FAFS.
14   See Case M.4420 - Crédit Agricole/Fiat Auto/FAFS, paragraph 14, Case M.3067 -
     Intesa/Capitalia/IMI, paragraph 49, and Case M.1370 - Peugeot/Credipar, paragraph 6.
                                                       4

4.1.2. Lending to SMEs - car dealer lending
4.1.2.1. Product market definition
(19)      In previous cases,15 the Commission considered a segmentation of the corporate
          banking market based on the customer group, i.e. between (i) banking services
          to large corporate customers and (ii) banking services to SMEs. The
          Commission has also considered a segmentation of the corporate banking
          services market based on the category of products (e.g. loans, savings, etc.).16
(20)      The Notifying Parties submit the car dealer lending forms part of the wider
          market for loans to SMEs.
(21)      In any event, for the purposes of the present decision, the exact product market
          definition for lending to SMEs can be left open as the Transaction does not raise
          serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market under any
          plausible market definition.
4.1.2.2. Geographic market definition
(22)      The Commission has considered the market for corporate banking, in particular
          the possible market for lending to SMEs, to be national in scope.17
(23)      For the purposes of the present decision, the exact geographic market definition
          for lending to SMEs can be left open as the Transaction does not raise serious
          doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market under any plausible
          market definition.
 4.2. Competitive assessment
4.2.1. Notifying Parties' views
(24)      In the automotive financing market, PSA and the Fincos are active as so-called
          "captive financing companies" ("CFCs") which offer their services almost
          exclusively to customers who purchase a vehicle of their own car brand, or
          through their branded car dealers.18 Most original equipment manufacturers
          ("OEMs") have their own CFC, such as Volkswagen, Renault Nissan, Fiat,
          BMW or Daimler.
(25)      The Notifying Parties claim that the Transaction does not raise competition
          concerns for the following reasons.
(26)      First, CFCs only exist to support the sales of motor vehicles manufactured by
          their car parent company. Hence, from a demand-side perspective, they would
15   See M.3894 - UNICREDITO/HVB; M.2567 - NORDBANKEN/POSTGIROT; M.4844 -
     FORTIS/ABN AMRO ASSETS, M.5384, BNP PARIBAS/FORTIS, paragraph 11.
16   See M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO ASSETS, paragraph 26.
17   See COMP/M.4844 - Fortis/Abn Amro Assets, paragraph 80 and COMP/M.6168 - RBI/EFG
     Eurobank/JV, paragraph 17.
18   In the case of the Parties, on the hand the Fincos offer financial services primarily to customers
     purchasing an Opel/Vauxhall vehicle or to Opel/Vauxhall branded car dealers, while on the other
     hand BPF offers its financial services to customers purchasing a Peugeot, Citroën or DS vehicle (all
     PSA brands) or to PSA branded car dealers.
                                                        5

          not compete with other CFCs, but rather compete with companies offering other
          financing solutions, in particular retail banks, such as BNPP. Therefore, the
          services provided by the Fincos would not be substitutable with the services
          provided by other CFCs, including BPF and vice versa. On this basis, according
          to the Notifying Parties the horizontal overlaps triggered by the Transaction
          should only be analysed between the Fincos and BNPP and not between the
          Fincos and BPF.
(27)      Second, from a supply-side perspective, the Notifying Parties submit that BPF
          will still operate a CFC business and finance the acquisition of PSA-branded
          vehicles, while the Fincos will continue to finance the acquisition of
          Opel/Vauxhall-branded vehicles. Furthermore, [description of the Parties’ future
          business strategies].19
(28)      Third, the Notifying Parties argue that in all affected markets the Parties'
          combined market shares are moderate, the increment brought about by the
          Transaction is very limited and the concentration levels ("HHI") are very
          contained.
(29)      Fourth, the Notifying Parties argue that they will continue to face well-
          established competitors (in particular large retail banks) in markets which are
          characterized by low barriers to entry. In particular, in the motor vehicle lending
          market, entry is facilitated by the fact that loans are non-complex products,
          hence any financing company providing general financing services could enter
          the market. Moreover, no regulatory approval is required to offer such products.
(30)      Finally, the Notifying Parties claim that it would not be profitable for PSA to
          raise prices for Opel loans, as the availability of financing deals contributes to
          the sale of Opel-branded cars, which is its core business and that PSA’s joint
          control over the Fincos business will prevent BNPP from taking any such action.
4.2.2. Commission's assessment
(31)      The Commission preliminarily notes that competition for the provision of
          automotive financing and related services in relation to a vehicle of a specific
          brand generally occurs between the CFC of the brand in question and other
          operators offering financial solutions (e.g. loans), in particular retail banks. It
          follows that other CFCs do not offer these services for cars of brands other than
          their own, hence CFCs of different car brands are not in competition.
(32)      For CFCs such as the Fincos or BPF, non-captive sales are nearly inexistent.
          They occur essentially only when, at the time of purchasing a new PSA vehicle
          (for BPF) or of an Opel/Vauxhall vehicle (for the Fincos), the PSA or
          Opel/Vauxhall car dealer buys back the customer's used car. This used car will
          then be resold to another customer using financing and related services offered
          by BPF or Fincos.
19   The Notifying Parties confirmed [description of the Parties’ future business strategy for the EEA] in
     the next five years.
                                                       6


(37)      First, the Commission considers that, although the Parties' combined market
          shares are relatively high both if an overall market (including captive and non-
          captive sales) is considered ([40-50]% in value and [40-50]% in volume) and if
          a market limited to non-captive sales is taken into account ([40-50]% in both
          volume and value), the increment brought by the Fincos and BPF remains
          limited on the overall (captive and non-captive) market ([0-5]% in value and [0-
          5]% in volume for the Fincos and [0-5]% in value and [0-5]% in volume for
          BPF) and is de minimis ([0-5]%) on a possible market that includes only non-
          captive sales.
(38)      Second, post-merger, the Fincos will continue to face competition from a
          number of large and well established competitors, including, among others,
          ING/Record, KBC and Beobank.
(39)      Third, in Belgium, the Fincos and BPF generate [the vast majority] of their
          business from captive sales.22 This indicates that their activities only marginally
          overlap with each other and with BNPP's activities. Importantly, as indicated in
          Recital (27), [description of the Parties’ future business strategy] in the next five
          years.
(40)      Finally, the market investigation confirmed that the Transaction is unlikely to
          raise concerns in the market for motor vehicle lending in Belgium.23
(41)      Based on the above considerations, the Commission concludes that the
          Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
          market in the market for motor vehicles lending in Belgium.
4.2.2.2. Motor vehicle lending in Luxembourg
(42)      The table below provides the Parties' and their main competitors' combined
          market shares on the market for motor vehicles lending in Luxembourg in 2016.
          As for Belgium, market share data is provided under the two alternative
          approaches for the overall market (captive and non-captive) and for the
          merchant market (non-captive) under the two possible market share calculation
          methods based either on value or volume.
22   In 2016, in Belgium, the Fincos generated [the vast majority] of their loans (both in value and
     volume) in relation to Opel/Vauxhall-branded vehicles, and BPF generated [the vast majority] of their
     loans (both in value and volume) in relation to PSA-branded vehicles.
23   For completeness, only one competitor raised concerns due to BNPP's strong position in the market.
     The Commission considers however that BNPP's position is not merger specific and that the
     increment brought about by the Transaction is negligible.
                                                        8


4.2.2.3. Motor vehicle lending in Italy
(48)       As regards the market for motor vehicle lending in Italy, on the hypothetical
           overall market including captive and non-captive sales of these services in Italy,
           the Parties' combined market share remains below 20%. Considering only non-
           captive sales, the combined market shares lead to a very moderately affected
           market ([20-30]%) with de minimis increments brought by the Fincos and BPF
           ([0-5]% each).
(49)       Respondents to the market investigation did not raise any concern with regard to
           the market for motor vehicle lending in Italy.
(50)       Based on the above considerations, the Commission concludes that the
           Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
           market in the market for motor vehicles lending in Italy.
4.2.2.4. Lending services to SMEs in Belgium
(51)       As regards the market for lending to SMEs, the Parties' combined market shares
           are moderate ([20-30]%) with de minimis increments brought by the Fincos ([0-
           5]%) and by BPF ([0-5]%).26
(52)       Also in relation to lending to car dealers, the Notifying Parties explain that the
           market is wide and that, in this space, CFCs in general are insignificant players
           compared to retail banks, since they merely focus on lending services to dealers
           of their own car brand.
(53)       Respondents to the market investigation did not raise any concerns with regard
           to the market for lending services to SMEs in Belgium.
(54)       Based on the above considerations, the Commission concludes that the
           Transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
           market in the market for lending services to SMEs in Belgium.
5.       CONCLUSION
(55)       For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
           notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with
           the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of
           the Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                                 For the Commission
                                                                 (Signed)
                                                                 Karmenu VELLA
                                                                 Member of the Commission
26   If a narrower market limited to lending to car dealers only is considered, the Transaction does not lead
     to any affected markets.
                                                         10
