                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                 Brussels, 8.8.2017
                                                                 C(2017) 5659 final
 In the published version of this decision, some
 information has been omitted pursuant to Article
 17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004                            PUBLIC VERSION
 concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
 other confidential information. The omissions are
 shown thus […]. Where possible the information
 omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a             To the notifying party:
 general description.
Subject:             Case M.8553 – BANCO SANTANDER / BANCO POPULAR
                     GROUP Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council
                     Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the
                     European Economic Area2
Dear Sir or Madam,
(1)         On 14 July 2017, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
            concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which Banco
            Santander S.A. ("Santander", "the Notifying Party", Spain) acquires within the
            meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation control of the whole of
            Banco Popular Español S.A. ("Popular") by way of purchase of shares ("the
            Transaction").3
1.        THE PARTIES AND THE TRANSACTION
(2)         Santander is the parent company of an international group of banking and
            financial companies, operating mainly in Spain, other European countries
            including Portugal and the United Kingdom, Latin America and the United
            States.
1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
      the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
      replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
      the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2     OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
3     Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 234, 20.07.2017, p. 14.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

(3)        Popular is a Spanish financial entity listed on the Madrid, Barcelona, Bilbao and
           Valencia stock exchanges. Popular provides commercial, retail, investment and
           wholesale banking services, as well as insurance services, both in Spain and
           Portugal.
(4)        On 6 June 2017, due to Popular's stressed liquidity situation, the European
           Central Bank (“ECB”) decided that Popular was “failing or likely to fail” in
           accordance with Article 18 (1) of the Single Resolution Mechanism set out in
           Regulation (EU) No 806/2014) ("Single Resolution Mechanism Regulation")4.
           On 7 June 2017 the Commission approved, under the framework of the the
           Single Resolution Mechanism Regulation, the resolution scheme of Popular,
           based on the proposal by the Single Resolution Board (“SRB”).5
(5)        On the same day, the Commission adopted a decision based on Article 7(3) of
           the Merger Regulation granting the derogation from the standstill obligation
           subject to certain conditions and to the extent necessary for the financial
           stability of Popular (“the derogation decision”)6.The compliance with the
           conditions set out in the derogation decision is monitored by a Monitoring
           Trustee.7
(6)        Following the adoption of the resolution scheme, Santander acquired sole
           control over Popular. As a result, the entire business of Popular and its
           subsidiaries have been transferred to Santander as of 7 June 2017.
(7)        Therefore, the Transaction constitutes a concentration within the meaning of
           Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
2.       EU DIMENSION
(8)        The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
           more than EUR 5 000 million8. Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess
           of EUR 250 million, but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
           aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member State.
4   OJ L 225, 30.7.2014, p.1-90, Regulation (EU) No 806/2014 of the European Parliament and of the
    Council of 15 July 2014 establishing uniform procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and
    certain investment firms in the framework of a Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Resolution
    Fund and amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
5   OJ L 178, 11.7.2017, p.15, Commission Decision (EU) 2017/1246 of 7 June 2017 endorsing the
    resolution scheme for Banco Popular Español S.A.
6   COMP/M.8553, Banco Santander S.A./Banco Popular Group S.A. Commission Decision pursuant to
    Article 7(3) of Council Regulation N° 139/2004 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the European
    Economic Area. Non-confidential version published in the Merger Registry on the competition
    website: http://ec.europa.eu/competition/mergers/cases/decisions/m8553_222_3.pdf .
7   This Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the
    EEA Agreement does not constitute a confirmation that the Parties complied with the conditions set
    out in the Article 7(3) derogation decision of 7 June 2017.
8   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation.
                                                          2

(9)        The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension pursuant to Article 1(2) of
           the Merger Regulation.
3.       RELEVANT MARKETS
(10)       The Parties' activities overlap in retail and corporate banking, leasing, factoring
           in Spain and Portugal and in the provision of ATM services in Spain.
(11)       In previous decisions the Commission has considered the following relevant
           markets in the banking sector: (i) retail banking, (ii) corporate banking (iii)
           investment banking (iv) leasing, (v) factoring (vi) payment cards, (vii) financial
           market services, (viii) asset management.9
(12)       While retail banking includes all banking services to private individuals and
           very small enterprises, corporate banking comprises banking services to large
           corporate customers (hereinafter referred to as "LCC’s") and smaller
           commercial clients such as small and medium-sized enterprises (hereinafter
           referred to as "SME’s").
(13)       On the basis of the results of the market investigation, the Commission has
           confirmed the above segmentation of the market along both products (deposits,
           loans, cards etc.) and customer lines (retail, corporate).10
  3.1.   Retail Banking
3.1.1. Relevant product market
(14)       In previous cases11 the Commission has considered that retail banking can be
           further divided into a number of individual product markets, namely personal
           current accounts, saving accounts (deposits), lending (personal loans, consumer
           credit, mortgages, etc.),private banking services, mutual funds and other
           investment products. However, the Commission has not concluded on the
           market definition.
(15)       In any event, the exact product market definition with respect to retail banking
           can be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the competitive
           assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact delineation of the
           markets.
9    M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets; M.5384 - BNP Paribas/Fortis; M.3894, Unicredito/HVB M.
     5726 - Deutsche Bank/ Sal. Oppenheim.
10 Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, question 8.1.
11 M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets; and M.5948 - Banco Santander/Rainbow; M.3894,
     Unicredito/HVB.
                                                    3

3.1.2. Relevant geographic market
(16)     In past decisions the Commission considered the market for retail banking to be
         national or regional in scope, depending on the characteristics of the countries
         concerned.12
(17)     In any event, the exact geographic market definition with respect to retail
         banking can be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the
         competitive assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact
         delineation of the markets.
 3.2.   Corporate Banking
3.2.1. Relevant product market
(18)     In respect of corporate banking services, the Commission has distinguished
         between services to SMEs and LCCs,13 although the Commission has observed
         that there is no obvious single parameter by which companies can be designated
         as SMEs or LCCs and which would be applicable to all market players.
(19)     The Commission has also pointed out that there are several indications that,
         within corporate banking, distinct relevant product markets for (i) deposits and
         savings (ii) loans (iii) domestic payment services/ current accounts (iv) foreign
         payment services and (v) cash management services could be identified.14
(20)     In any event, the exact product market definition with respect to corporate
         banking can be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the
         competitive assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact
         delineation of the markets.
3.2.2. Relevant geographic market
(21)     As for the geographic definition, in previous cases the Commission considered
         the market for banking services offered to SMEs to be national in scope, while
         for LCCs it considered both national markets or markets which are wider in
         scope but ultimately left the question open.15
(22)     In any event, the exact geographic market definition with respect to corporate
         banking can be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the
         competitive assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact
         delineation of the markets.
12 See for instance, COMP/M.3894 Unicredito/HVB, Commission decision of 18 October 2005;
    COMP/M.4356 – Deutsche Bank/Berliner Bank; COMP/M.5811 – Erste Bank/ASK.
13   M.4844 - Fortis/ABN      AMRO     ASSETS;    M.3894     – Unicredito/HVB; and  M.2567
    Nordbanken/Postgirot.
14 M.4844 - Fortis/ABN AMRO ASSETS; and M.5384 - BNP Paribas / Fortis.
15 M.3894 - Unicredito/HVB and M.2567- Nordbanken/Postgirot.
                                                 4

 3.3.   Leasing
3.3.1. Relevant product market
(23)     Leasing comprises the leasing of all kinds of assets such as industrial machines,
         computers, real estate or vehicles. In previous cases, the Commission
         distinguished between two types of leasing (a) operational leasing and (ii)
         financial leasing.16 The Commission has also considered further segmentation of
         the leasing market according to the assets leased, but left open whether such
         segmentation would be necessary.17
(24)     In any event, the exact product market definition with respect to leasing can be
         left open for the purpose of the present decision as the competitive assessment
         would remain the same irrespective of the exact delineation of the markets.
3.3.2. Relevant geographic market
(25)     In previous cases the Commission considered the markets for leasing to be
         national in scope.18
(26)     In any event, the exact geographic market definition with respect to leasing can
         be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the competitive
         assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact delineation of the
         markets.
3.4.    Factoring
3.4.1. Relevant product market
(27)     Factoring comprises the purchase of all kinds of receivables from businesses,
         thereby providing customers with liquidity.19
(28)     In previous cases the Commission considered segmenting factoring services into
         the following categories (i) prepayment on the value of invoices, (ii) invoice
         collection and sales ledger management services, (iii) credit insurance and (iv)
         services comprising a package of all of the fore mentioned, also referred to as
         "full factoring".20
16 M.4844 FORTIS/ABN Amro Assets, M.2970 GE/ABB Structured Finance, M.3090
    Volkswagen/Offset/Crescent/LeasePlan/JV and M.7944 Credit Mutual/GE Capital's Factoring and
    Equipment Financing Businesses in France and Germany.
17 M. 4844 Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets; and COMP/M.5384 - BNP Paribas / Fortis
18 M.5384 BNP Paribas/Fortis, M.7944 Credit Mutuel/GE Capital's Factoring and Equipment Financing
    Businesses in France and Germany.
19 M.3894 UNICREDITO/HVB.
20 M.7944 – Credit Mutuel / GE Capital's Factoring and Equipment Financing Businesses in France and
    Germany
                                                    5

(29)     In any event, the exact product market definition with respect to factoring can be
         left open for the purpose of the present decision as the competitive assessment
         would remain the same irrespective of the exact delineation of the markets.
3.4.2. Relevant geographic market
(30)     In previous cases the Commission considered the factoring market to be national
         in scope.21
(31)     In any event, the exact geographic market definition with respect to factoring
         can be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the competitive
         assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact delineation of the
         markets.
3.5.   Payment cards
3.5.1. Relevant product market
(32)     In previous cases22, the Commission distinguished two separate activities from
         card processing: (i) the issuing of cards and the (ii) acquiring of merchants for
         card payment acceptance. Within the activity of payment card issuing, the
         Commission previously considered the distinction between different types of
         cards (i) debit and credit cards, (ii) personal and corporate cards, (iii) national
         and international cards, (iv) selective and general cards and (v) universal and
         special purpose cards. The Commission has ultimately left the exact market
         definition open.
(33)     In any event, the exact product market definition with respect to payment cards
         can be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the competitive
         assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact delineation of the
         markets.
3.5.2. Relevant geographic market
(34)     The Commission has considered the market for payment cards to be national in
         scope.23
(35)     In any event, the exact geographic market definition with respect to payment
         cards can be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the competitive
         assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact delineation of the
         markets.
21 M.4844 FORTIS/ABN Amro Assets, M.7947 Banco Santander Totta/Banif.
22 M.4844 FORTIS/ABN AMRO ASSETS; M.5384 BNP Paribas/Fortis; M.7078 SANTANDER
    CONSUMER FINANCE / EL CORTE INGLES / FINANCIERA EL CORTE INGLES.
23  M.4844 FORTIS/ABN AMRO ASSETS; M.5384 BNP Paribas/Fortis.
                                                 6

3.6.    ATM services
3.6.1. Relevant product market
(36)      ATM transactions require a number of processing services of a technical nature,
          such as the routing of transactions, requests for authorizations to the card issuing
          bank, card identification, etc.
(37)      The Commission has previously considered ATM services as part of the market
          for the provision of payment services, which in turn was analysed as a sub-
          segment of the market for retail banking services, but ultimately left the market
          definition open.24
(38)      In any event, the exact product market definition with respect to ATM services
          can be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the competitive
          assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact delineation of the
          markets.
3.6.2. Relevant geographic market
(39)      The Commission has so far not considered a geographic market definition with
          respect to ATM services.
(40)      In any event, the exact geographic market definition with respect to ATM
          services can be left open for the purpose of the present decision as the
          competitive assessment would remain the same irrespective of the exact
          delineation of the markets.
4.      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
(41)      The Transaction results in a number of horizontal overlaps between Santander
          and Popular in Spain and Portugal. Depending on the market definition the
          Transaction leads to the following affected markets:
            <U+F02D> In Spain: at national level in retail banking (and some of its segments),
                corporate banking (and some of its segments), leasing and factoring; and at
                the regional (infra-national) level in retail banking and corporate banking
                in Andalucia, Canary Islands, Cantabria, Castilla La Manche, Castilla y
                León, Galicia and Madrid.
            <U+F02D> In Portugal: at national level in retail loans, leasing and factoring and at the
                regional (infra-national) level in credits in Aveiro and Coimbra. 25
(42)      In addition, the Transaction leads to a vertical link between the banking
          activities of the Parties and the ATM services operated by a company controlled
          by Santander.
24 M.3894 UNICREDITO/HVB, paragraph 9.
25  According to the Notifying Party, no objective data on market shares is available per region. The
    Notifying Party has provided proxies based on the available data per city in each region.
                                                       7



Leasing
(49)    As concerns leasing, in the overall Spanish leasing market (excluding cars) the
        combined market share of the Parties amounts to [20-30]% with an increment of
        [5-10]% brought by Popular.
(50)    Should the market for leasing be further segmented the Parties’ market shares
        remain similar: in leasing for cars ([20-30]% with an increment of [0-5]%),
        leasing for SMEs ([20-30]% with an increment of [5-10]%) and leasing for
        LCCs ([30-40]%, with an increment of [5-10]%).
(51)    BBVA ([10-20]%) and CaixaBank ([10-20]%), and to a lesser extent Banco
        Sabadell, are the main competitors to Santander in the overall leasing market in
        Spain, and will continue to be active post-transaction.
(52)    The respondents to the market investigation, generally took the view that there
        are other large players specialised in the provision of leasing services in Spain
        and that Popular does not have a significant presence in the market for leasing as
        compared to Santander.27
(53)    In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
        raise serious doubts as regards its compatibility with the internal market,
        irrespective of the precise product market definition in relation to the leasing
        market in Spain.
Factoring
(54)    As regards factoring, in the overall Spanish factoring market the merged entity
        will have a combined market share of [20-30]%, with an increment deriving
        from the transaction of [5-10]%.
(55)    Should the market for factoring be further segmented, the Parties' market shares
        would not differ substantially. Indeed, in the factoring services of (i) prepayment
        or advance on the value of the invoices (confirming), (ii) invoice collection and
        sales ledger management services (with recourse factoring); (iii) credit insurance
        (without recourse), or (iv) services comprising a package of all the above (full
        factoring), the Parties would have a combined market share not exceeding [30-
        40]% with a maximum increment of [5-10]% brought by Popular, under any of
        these segmentations.
(56)    Following the transaction the combined entity will continue to face a number of
        significant competitors in particular two of the largest banks in Spain,
        CaixaBank and BBVA, with a market share of [30-40]% and [10-20]% in the
        factoring-market respectively.
(57)    Respondents to the market investigation indicated that Popular, with a market
        share of [5-10]%, is not a close competitor to Santander in the market for
        factoring. According to the market participants, BBVA, CaixaBank, Banc
27 Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, question 8.1.
                                                 10

         Sabadell together with Santander and to a lesser extent, Bankia, are the main
         players in the factoring market in Spain.28
(58)     In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
         raise serious doubts as regards its compatibility with the internal market,
         irrespective of the precise product market definition in the market for factoring
         in Spain.
Payment cards
(59)     The combined market share of the Parties in Spain in the market for payment
         cards remain below [20-30]% in all segments except in the sub-segment of the
         market for debit cards where the combined entity will have a market share of
         [20-30]% with an increment deriving from the transaction of [0-5]%.
(60)     Following the Transaction a number of significant market participants will
         remain present in market for debit cards, including CaixaBank and BBVA with
         a market share of [30-40]% and [10-20]% respectively.
(61)     In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
         raise serious doubts as regards its compatibility with the internal market,
         irrespective of the precise product market definition in the market for payment
         cards in Spain.
ATM services
(62)     In Spain there are three national payment card schemes namely Servired, 4B and
         Euro 6000 operating ATMs. Out of the 53 873 ATMs in Spain, 12 752 of them
         (23.7%) belong to the 4B scheme. Both Santander and Popular are affiliated to
         the 4B scheme, whereby Santander currently holds [60-70]% of this ATMs
         network and Popular [20-30]%. 29
(63)     After the Transaction, the combined entity will hold [90-100]% of 4B and thus
         have a market share of [20-30]% of all ATMs owned or operated on the Spanish
         market.30
(64)     In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
         raise serious doubts as regards its compatibility with the internal market,
         irrespective of the precise product market definition in the market for ATM
         services in Spain.
28 Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, questions 17 and 18. Questionnaire Q2 – Customers (Spain),
   questions 7 and 8.
29 It should be noted that Popular is not the owner of the ATMs. Popular's ATMs are held and managed
   by a Joint Venture with Crédit Mutuel (see recital (100)).
30 The combined entity's ATMs is calculated following a worst case scenario that all ATMs of the Joint
   Venture between Popular and Crédit Mutuel can be attributed to Popular (thus 27.5% of all 4B
   ATMs).
                                                        11

Portugal
Retail and corporate banking
(65)     The combined market share of the Parties in Portugal does not exceed [10-20]%
         in almost all markets where the Parties' activities overlap. However, the
         Transaction does lead to affected markets with regard to retail loans, leasing,
         factoring and in certain regional markets.
(66)     Following the Transaction, a number of significant market participants will
         remain present in the overall market for retail and corporate banking, including
         BCP Millennium with market shares between [10-20]% (Deposits of LCC) at
         the lowest and [10-20]% (mortgages) in its strongest market for which data is
         available; CGD with market shares between [10-20]% (deposits of SMEs) and
         [30-40]% (sight deposits); and Novo Banco with market shares between [5-
         10]% (Deposits of SMEs) at the lowest and [10-20]% in its strongest market
         (Credits to LCC).
(67)     Additionally, the increment caused by the Transaction is generally limited
         (below [5-10]%), with an exception for Money market operations ([5-10]%
         increment, resulting in a combined market share of [10-20]%).
(68)     According to the respondents of the market investigation, Santander and Popular
         are not close competitors to each other in the Portuguese markets, as can be
         derived from the market shares set out in recitals (56) and (57), reflecting the
         diverging profiles of the Parties in Portugal, with Santander being a stronger
         bank than Popular and being active on all market segments.31
Retail loans
(69)     With regard to the market for retail loans on a national level, the Parties'
         combined market share thus would nevertheless remain below [20-30]%. The
         increment from the Transaction is limited to [0-5]%.
(70)     Following the transaction, the combined entity will have to face competitive
         pressure exercised by nationally active market participants. All remaining
         market participants such as BCP Millennium, Novo Banco, and Caixa Geral de
         Depósitos ("CGD"), have larger market shares than Popular before the Proposed
         Transaction (CGD has a [0-5]% market share, Novo Banco has [5-10]% market
         share and BCP has [10-20]% market share). All competitors will remain active
         on the market and together with the Portuguese BPI32 will compete with the
         merged entity.
(71)     The responses to the market investigation seem to confirm the Commission's
         assessment that the acquisition of Popular by Santander is unlikely to raise
31 Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, questions 17 and 18. Questionnaire Q3 – Customers (Portugal),
   questions 8 and 9.
32 The Notifying Parties did not provide data on the market shares of BPI. BPI is the fourth biggest bank
   in Portugal (mostly active in SME and corporate sector).
                                                      12

         competition concerns as the remaining competitors on the market for retail loans
         exert a sufficient competitive pressure.
(72)     In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
         raise serious doubts as regards its compatibility with the internal market,
         irrespective of the precise product market definition in the market for retail
         loans in Portugal.
Leasing
(73)     As regards leasing in Portugal, the Parties have a combined market share of [20-
         30]% on the overall leasing market, with an increment of [10-20]% due to
         Popular. The Parties did not provide any further breakdown of the leasing
         market for Portugal. The Parties did however provide confirmation that under no
         plausible market segmentation, the combined market share would exceed [30-
         40]%
(74)     As can be seen in Table 1, CGD is the second largest bank active on the leasing
         market with a market share of [10-20]%. As observed by the parties, services on
         the leasing market are homogeneous, with a high degree of substitutability
         between them. Furthermore, the Parties argue that leasing competes directly
         with other services such as direct loans. This allows clients to switch to a
         different source of financing without incurring significant costs.
(75)     According to the respondents to the market investigation, Santander and Popular
         are not close competitors to each other in the Portuguese leasing market. The
         replies by market participants confirm that all large Portuguese banks are active
         on the leasing market, putting them all in direct competition with Santander and
         Popular.33
(76)     In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction does not
         raise serious doubts with regards to its compatibility with the internal market,
         irrespective of the precise product market definition in the market for leasing in
         Portugal.
Factoring
(77)     The Notifying Party did not provide a break-down of the factoring market in
         Portugal, but only a combined overall market share of [30-40]% with an
         increment of [0-5]% due to Popular. The Parties provided confirmation that
         under no plausible further market segmentation within the Factoring market, the
         combined market share would exceed [30-40]%
(78)     Based on the information provided by the Parties, the combined entity's closest
         competitors in the financial sector are CGD with a market share of [10-20]%
         and BCP with a market share of [5-10]%.
33 Questionaire Q1 – Competitors, questions 16, 17 and 18; and Questionnaire Q3 – Customers in
   Portugal, questions 6 and 7.
                                                  13




4.2.     Vertical assessment
(91)      The Transaction gives rise to a potential vertical link between the banking
          activities of the Parties and the ATM services in Spain.
(92)      In Spain there are three national payment card schemes operating ATMs,
          namely Servired, 4B System and Euro 6000 .
(93)      Servired is the largest scheme including BBVA, CaixaBank, Bankia, Sabadell
          and Bankinter, which correspond to 42 million cards issued, more than 900
          thousand affiliated merchants and a network of around 32 500 ATMs. The
          smallest scheme, Euro6000 has around 10 million cards, 140 thousand affiliated
          merchants and around 8700 ATMs.
(94)      4B System is currently governed by Santander, which holds a stake of [60-
          70]%, Popular which holds a stake of [20-30]%36 and Banca March, holding a
          [0-5]% stake. 4B System also has several affiliates including ING Openbank
          and WiZink. Overall the banks in 4B System represent around 20 million cards,
          around 450 thousand affiliated merchants and a network of 12 750 ATMs.
(95)      Following the Transaction the combined entity will hold [90-100]% in 4B
          System but the control situation of the scheme will not change since already pre-
          transaction Santander was the largest shareholder controlling the majority of
          shares.
(96)      The Parties’ combined market share in terms of the number of ATMs at the
          national level in Spain amounts to [20-30]% of all ATMs being owned or
          operated on the Spanish market.
(97)      During the market investigation one market participant raised concerns about
          the impact of the Transaction on the access to the ATM networks. It argued that
          pre-merger Popular, via its subsidiary, Euro Automatic Cash, Entidad de Pago,
          S.L.U, jointly controlled by Popular and Crédit Mutuel, was the only relatively
          large bank, willing to sign bilateral agreements with other banks to set reduced
          fees, and that following the Transaction the merged entity could pursue a
          foreclosure strategy, restraining access to the ATMs of the merged entity.37
(98)      Based on the information provided by the Notifying Party, payment card
          schemes in Spain do not have the capacity to determine prices for withdrawing
          cash. Indeed, pursuant to the Royal Decree 11/2015 of 2 October 2015
          regulating the commissions for withdrawal of cash in ATMs (the Decree) the
          fees are directly fixed by each of the entities owners of the ATMs which can be
          the banks or as in the case of Popular a Joint Venture between banks.
(99)      In the present case, irrespective of the market definition, the combined market
          shares of the Parties in the market for ATM services following the Transaction
36  Popular is not the owner of 4B's ATMs corresponding to its stake of 27.5% in 4B System. Popular has
    a stake of 50% in a joint venture ("Euro Automatic Cash Entidad de Pago, S.L.U ") which holds such
    ATMS, jointly with Crédit Mutuel, which has the outstanding 50%.
37  Questionnaire Q1 – Competitors, question 24.
                                                      17

         will remain below [20-30]% with an increment of [5-10]% in terms of a number
         of ATMs.38 As a result, other banks in Spain owning more than [70-80]% of
         ATMs will continue to provide services in the Spanish market and could provide
         access to their ATM networks to other banks not having their own ATM
         network.
(100)    Moreover, the Commission notes that Popular's participation in 4B is due to its
         participation in a joint venture between Popular and Group Crédit Mutuel39
         (Euro Automatic Cash, Entidad de Pago, S.L.U40). As a result, any measures
         that Santander would want to implement post Transaction would be subject to
         the agreement of its future JV partner, Credit Mutuel.41This casts doubts on
         Santander's ability to unilaterally terminate or amend the bilateral contracts
         between the JV and other banks.
(101)    As a result, and in particular in view of the limited market share of the merged
         entity on the upstream ATM services market, any foreclosure effects seems
         unlikely, as the merger entity would lack the ability to engage in such
         foreclosure strategy which could be defeated by the other ATM owners.
(102)    In view of the above, the Commission considers that the Transaction is unlikely
         to raise serious doubts with regards to its compatibility with the internal market
         in relation to the vertical link between banking services and a potential market
         for ATM services.
5.      CONCLUSION
(103)    For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
         notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with
         the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of
         the Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                                   For the Commission
                                                                                   (signed)
                                                                      Karmenu VELLA
                                                           Member of the Commission
38 In terms of number of cards issued 27% in Spain, in terms of merchants affiliated 29% and 24% in
   terms of the number of ATMs.
39 M.6978 Banco Popular SA/Group Crédit Mutuel/ATM Business.
40 The JV created in 2013 focuses on managing and developing the ATM network of Popular in Spain.
41 The JV decisions require a majority in the Board of Directors. This Board is composed out of 4
   directors proposed by Popular and 4 by Crédit Mutuel.
                                                     18
 <<--NEW VERSION-->>                                 EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                               Brussels, 7.6.2017
                                                               C(2017) 4059 final
     In the published version of this decision, some                     PUBLIC VERSION
     information has been omitted pursuant to Article
     17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
     concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
     other confidential information. The omissions are
     shown thus […]. Where possible the information
     omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
     general description.
                                                               To the notifying party:
Subject :            Case M.8553 – BANCO SANTANDER S.A. / BANCO POPULAR
                     GROUP S.A.
                     Commission decision pursuant to Article 7(3) of Council Regulation
                     Nº 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the European
                     Economic Area2
                     Request for derogation
Dear Sir or Madam,
(1)       We refer to your application for a derogation from the suspension obligation
          provided for in Article 7(1) of the Merger Regulation with regard to the proposed
          acquisition by Banco Santander S.A. (“Santander”, Spain) of sole control over
          Banco Popular Español, S.A. (“BPE”, Spain) submitted pursuant to Article 7(3)
          of the Merger Regulation on 6 June 2017 (the Transaction). Santander is referred
          to as the Notifying Party, and together with BPE as the Parties.
1.        THE PARTIES AND THE TRANSACTION
(2)       Santander is the parent company of an international group of banking and
          financial companies, operating mainly in Spain, other European countries
1         OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (“the Merger Regulation”). With effect from 1 December 2009, the
          Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (“TFEU”) has introduced certain changes, such
          as the replacement of “Community” by “Union” and “common market” by “internal market”. The
          terminology of the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2         OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p.3 (“the EEA Agreement”).
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

    including Portugal and the United Kingdom, Latin America and the United
    States. Santander is active in retail banking, treasury and insurance.
(3) BPE is a Spanish financial entity listed in the Madrid, Barcelona, Bilbao and
    Valencia stock exchanges. BPE provides commercial, retail, investment and
    wholesale banking services, as well as insurance services, both in Spain and
    Portugal.
(4) Due to BPE’s recent stressed liquidity situation, the European Central Bank
    (“ECB”) decided on 6 June 2017 that BPE was “failing or likely to fail” and
    notified the Single Resolution Board (“SRB”) of its decision. The SRB therefore
    proposed a resolution scheme to the European Commission.
(5) On 7 June 2017 the Commission endorsed, under the framework of the Single
    Resolution Mechanism set out in Regulation (EU) No 806/2014 (“SRMR”),3
    Article 18(7)4 the resolution scheme of BPE, based on the proposal by the SRB.
    The resolution scheme of BPE entered into force on 7 June 2017.
(6) According to information provided by the Notifying Party, the Transaction
    concerns the acquisition by Santander of sole control over BPE pursuant to the
    SRMR. The operation is carried out by virtue of a Sale of Business Tool as
    specified in the resolution scheme resulting in the transfer of the shares of BPE to
    Santander. As a result, the entire business of BPE and its subsidiaries have been
    transferred to Santander as of 7 June 2017.
2.  EU DIMENSION
(7) The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
    more than EUR 5 000 million. Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess
    of EUR 250 million, but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their
    aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The
    proposed Transaction therefore has an EU dimension within the meaning of
    Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
3.  THE APPLICATION FOR DEROGATION
(8) The Notifying Party submits that BPE has suffered a rapid deterioration of its
    liquidity situation that has led to a loss of [40-50]% of its market capitalisation in
    the […] days preceding the request for derogation. The Notifying Party submits
    that the financial stability of BPE may only be preserved if it is rapidly acquired
3   Regulation (EU) No 806/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2014
    establishing uniform rules and a uniform procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and
    certain investment firms in the framework of a Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single
    Resolution Fund and amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, OJ L 225, 30.7.2014, p. 1-90.
4   Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing
    a framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms and
    amending Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and Directives 2001/24/EC, 2002/47/EC, 2004/25/EC,
    2005/56/EC, 2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU, 2012/30/EU and 2013/36/EU, and Regulations (EU)
    No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 648/2012, of the European Parliament and of the Council, OJ L 173,
    12.6.2014, p.190-348.
                                                 2

     by a stable and reputable market player who is entitled to take all appropriate
     measures aimed at redressing the situation.
(9)  The resolution scheme awards full control of BPE to Santander. However, the
     stand-still obligation provided for in Article 7(1) of the Merger Regulation would
     prevent Santander from taking such appropriate measures and would therefore
     seriously affect the economic stability of BPE and the financial interests of
     Santander.
(10) In order to implement the measures necessary for the financial stability of BPE
     before the adoption of the final decision of the Commission under the Merger
     Regulation (“interim period”) the Notifying Party requests the Commission for
     the derogation from the standstill obligation provided for in Article 7(1). The
     measures would be limited to what is necessary to avoid a further deterioration of
     BPE’s solvency and other regulatory ratios and would not lead to the operational
     integration of BPE within Santander. The Notifying Party requests for derogation
     to implement the following measures:
     (a)    appoint the members of the board of directors and the managing bodies of
            BPE and any BPE affiliate to the extent that it is strictly necessary for the
            implementation of points (b) to (i) below
     (b)    manage and implement any measures to ensure compliance by BPE and its
            participated entities with any regulation regarding money laundering and
            terrorism financing prevention, and adapting BPE’s policy to Santander’s
            global policy in this regard;
     (c)    manage the evolution of BPE’s liquidity, treasury, solvency, credit, market
            and operational risks;
     (d)    adopt measures aimed at enabling BPE to comply with regulatory
            financial ratios, including solvency and liquidity;
     (e)    manage BPE’s prudential supervision, including contacts with the
            European Central Bank, Banco de España and national resolution
            authorities;
     (f)    manage BPE’s audit and accounting obligations;
     (g)    approve the secondment of Santander’s employees to BPE as a temporary
            measure. The number of these employees will be limited to what is strictly
            necessary and they will not carry out operational integration activities;
     (h)    adopt any other measure that may be deemed appropriate to preserve
            BPE’s financial stability during the interim period and which are not of a
            commercial nature; and
     (i)    in general, adopt any measure to comply with (a) the resolution scheme
            approved by the SRB in relation to BPE, (b) the Spanish National
            Resolution Authority governing committee resolution approving the acts
            implementing the SRB resolution scheme, and (c) the SPA to be entered
            into with the FROB acting on behalf of BPE’s shareholders.
                                              3

(11) The Notifying Party further commits to minimize any exchange of sensitive
     information to what is strictly necessary.
(12) Subject to the Commission’s approval the Notifying Party will appoint an
     independent trustee to act as exclusive trustee to supervise that Santander
     complies during the interim period with the terms under which the derogation is
     granted. The Notifying Party will enter into the standard trustee mandate with the
     trustee as soon as possible from the submission of this request for derogation.
(13) Lastly, the Notifying Party commits to keep during the interim period a separate
     operational structure of BPE. In particular, Santander will adopt the
     organizational measures to ensure that the BPE’s operational structure is ring-
     fenced and not operationally integrated with the Notifying Party until the
     Commission has taken a final decision on the Transaction.
(14) The Notifying Party considers that the benefits flowing from the derogation
     outweigh any potential adverse effects that it may have on any third party
4.   THE   CONDITIONS FOR DEROGATION PURSUANT TO ARTICLE                   7(3) OF THE
     MERGER REGULATION
(15) Pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Merger Regulation, a concentration falling under
     that Regulation shall not be implemented either before its notification or until it
     has been declared compatible with the common market. Pursuant to Article 7(3)
     of the Merger Regulation, the Commission may, on reasoned request, grant
     derogation from the obligation imposed in Article 7(1).
(16) Article 7(3) of the Merger Regulation provides that, in deciding on the request,
     the Commission must take into account, inter alia, the effects of the suspension
     on one or more undertakings concerned by the concentration or on a third party
     and the threat to competition posed by the concentration.
(17) Derogation from the obligation to suspend concentrations is granted only
     exceptionally, normally in circumstances where suspension provided for in the
     Merger regulation would cause serious damage to the undertakings concerned by
     a concentration, or to a third party.
A.   The Transaction falls under the suspension obligation pursuant to Article
     7(1) of the Merger Regulation
(18) The Commission considers that the proposed Transaction constitutes, on the basis
     of the information provided by the parties so far, a concentration within the
     meaning of Article 3 of the Merger Regulation and would have an EU dimension
     according to Article 1(2) thereof. Hence the operation falls under the suspension
     obligation laid down in Article 7(1) of the Merger Regulation.
B.   The effects of the suspension on the undertakings concerned and third
     parties
(19) The Commission notes that BPE is in serious financial distress.
                                              4

(20) In particular the Commission notes that the SRB has concluded that the
     conditions for resolution, as referred to in Article 18(1) SRMR, were met and the
     Commission has endorsed this conclusion. In particular:
     (a)     On 6 June 2017, the ECB has concluded that BPE is failing or likely to fail
             on the basis of Article 18(4)(c) SRMR. In particular, taking into account
             the rapidly deteriorating liquidity situation of the BPE, the ECB
             considered that there were sufficient grounds supporting the determination
             that the BPE would, in the near future, be unable to pay its debts as they
             fall due.
     (b)     There is no reasonable prospect that any alternative private sector
             measures or supervisory action would prevent the failure of BPE within a
             reasonable timeframe. Given that the private sale process initiated by the
             BPE had not led to a positive outcome and given the difficulties of BPE to
             mobilise sufficient additional liquidity within the given timeframe, the
             SRB concluded that this condition is met.
     (c)     Resolution action would be necessary in the public interest. The SRB
             concluded that resolution action would be necessary to achieve the
             following resolution objectives outlined in Article 14 SRMR:
             –       to ensure the continuity of critical functions, namely: deposit
                     taking from households and non-financial corporations (small and
                     medium sized enterprises –“SMEs”- and non-SMEs); lending to
                     SMEs; and payment and cash services; and
             –       to avoid adverse effects on financial stability.
(21) The SRB has concluded that the winding up of BPE under normal insolvency
     proceedings would not meet those resolution objectives to the same extent and the
     Commission has endorsed this conclusion.
(22) In this context the Commission considers that the grant of a derogation pursuant
     to Article 7(3) of the Merger Regulation is appropriate, as otherwise there may be
     a considerable negative effect on BPE, on its customers and creditors as well as
     generally on financial stability. Therefore, it appears that the continuation of
     BPE’s critical functions can only be preserved if BPE is rapidly acquired by a
     stable and reputable market player who is entitled to take the necessary measures
     aimed at redressing the situation. Absent the derogation the Notifying Party
     would be prevented from taking such measures.
(23) The Commission considers that the suspension obligation imposed by Article 7(1)
     of the Merger Regulation could lead to serious harm to BPE, its customers and
     creditors, as well as to financial stability, while no negative effects are likely to
     arise in relation to third parties from providing derogation from this obligation.
C.   The threat to competition posed by the concentration
(24) Both Santander and BPE are active in the provision of banking services. BPE is
     active in Spain and Portugal, while Santander is a global banking and financial
     company. The activities of the Parties therefore overlap in Spain and Portugal in
     the areas of banking and insurance services.
                                                5

(25) The Commission notes that the available information on market shares does not
     allow drawing definitive conclusions regarding the Parties' competitive position
     in the possible relevant markets. It can however provide an indication of the
     combined position of the Parties in the geographic markets where BPE is active,
     i.e. Spain and Portugal.
(26) On the basis of information provided by the Notifying Party the Parties’
     combined market shares would be below [20-30]% in Spain in terms of overall
     market for credits, customer funds and the number of branches, and would be
     close to [20-30]% in the area of SMEs. In all these markets a number of credible
     competitors would remain present on the market, such as CaixaBank, BBVA and
     Bankia.
(27) As regards the markets in Portugal, the increment brought by BPE is estimated
     around [0-5]% and the combined market share of the Parties on the Portuguese
     banking markets is expected to be below [20-30]%.
(28) In conclusion, on the basis of the information provided by the Notifying Party and
     the information publicly available, the likelihood that the Transaction would raise
     serious doubts does not seem high, both regarding horizontal overlaps and
     vertical relationships or with regard to negative effects on a third party and to
     competition.
(29) Therefore, on the basis of the information provided by the parties, it appears
     prima facie that the Transaction is not likely to pose a threat to competition
     within the EEA.
D.   Balance of interests
(30) Based on the above, it appears that whilst the suspension obligation could
     seriously affect BPE, its customers and creditors, as well as financial stability, it
     is unlikely that granting the derogation would result in significant impediment of
     effective competition, and derogation does not appear to have adverse effects on
     one or more of the parties or on any third party. Therefore the Commission finds
     that derogation can be granted in accordance with the application and to the
     extent specified below.
5.   TERMS AND CONDITIONS
(31) According to Article 7 (3), fourth sentence, of the Merger Regulation, a
     derogation from the suspension obligation laid down by Article 7 (1) thereof may
     be made subject to conditions and obligations in order to ensure effective
     competition.
(32) On 6 June 2017 the Notifying Party committed that the requested derogation
     would only apply to measures listed in recital (10) above and only to the extent
     necessary to avoid a further derogation of BPE’s solvency and other regulatory
     ratios. Furthermore, the Notifying Party commits that the proposed measures will
     not lead to the operational integration of BPE within Santander before the
     Commission has taken a final decision on the transaction.
(33) Santander also commits to minimise any exchange of sensitive information to
     what is strictly necessary.
                                              6

(34) Based on the preceding considerations, the Commission has decided to grant a
     derogation from the suspension obligation with regard to the proposed
     concentration subject to the following conditions:
        –     Santander shall submit a complete notification of the Transaction to the
              Commission without delay, and in any event no later than […] from the
              adoption of the Article 7(3) decision in order to allow the assessment of
              the compatibility of the proposed concentration with the internal market
              and the EEA agreement.
        –     Until the Commission has adopted its decision on the compatibility of
              the Transaction, this derogation would allow Santander to take only
              actions which are necessary to restore Banco Popular’s viability as
              described in this Decision.
        –     The derogation is made subject to the condition that Santander will adopt
              the organizational measures to ensure that the BPE's business is ring-
              fenced and not operationally integrated with the Notifying Party, limiting
              the Notifying Party's influence to the minimum necessary, until the
              Commission has taken a final decision on the Transaction.
6.   CONCLUSION
(35) The Commission considers that the reasons given by the Notifying Party for
     derogation from the suspension obligations meet the requirements set out in
     Article 7(3) of the Merger Regulation.
(36) On the basis of the above considerations, and in accordance with Article 7(3) of
     the Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement, Santander is
     granted a derogation from the obligations imposed by Article 7 (1) of the Merger
     Regulation in accordance with the foregoing terms and conditions until the
     acquisition has been declared compatible with the internal market and the EEA
     Agreement by means of a decision pursuant to Article 6(1)b or 8(2) or a
     presumption pursuant to Article 10(6).
                                                   For the Commission
                                                   (Signed)
                                                   Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                   Member of the Commission
                                             7
