                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                               Brussels, 06.02.1997
                                                                 PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                 MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                 ARTICLE               6(1)(b)
                                                                 DECISION
                                                               To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject :          Case No IV/M.850 - Fortis/MeesPierson
                   Notification of 03-01-1997 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No
                   4064/89
1.     On 3 january 1997 the Commission received the notification of an operation by which the
       Fortis AG S.A. and Fortis Amev N.V. will acquire 100% of the shares of MeesPierson
       N.V. from ABN-AMRO Bank N.V.
2.     After examination of the notification the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of application of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and
       does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
       functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE OPERATION AND THE PARTIES
3.     Fortis is a Belgian-Dutch insurance and banking group. Fortis was formed by the merger
       between Compagnie Financière et de Réasssurance du Groupe AG (now called Fortis
       AG) and N.V. AMEV (now called Fortis AMEV) in 1990 (see Case IV/M.018
       AG/AMEV - 21.11.1990). The main activity of Fortis is insurance and banking. Its
       operations are principally based in Belgium and the Netherlands, with some presence in
       other member states.
4.     MeesPierson is a wholly owned subsidiary of ABN- AMRO. MeesPierson is a medium
       sized merchant bank with an international spread of activities. Its core activities are:
Rue de la Loi 200 - B-1049 Bruxelles - Belgique
Téléphone: standard (+32-2)299.11.11
Télex: COMEU B 21877 - Adresse télégraphique: COMEUR Bruxelles

     corporate finance, private banking, fund management and operational and information
     services. Furthermore MeesPierson is active in trade in currencies and money market
     instruments and their derivatives and trade in securities and their derivatives.
5.   It is the intention that AMEV/VSB N.V:, a 50%-50% subsidiary of Fortis AG and Fortis
     AMEV will act as purchaser of the share interest in MeesPierson. Following the
     transaction Fortis will have a hundred percent share interest in MeesPierson N.V.
II.  CONCENTRATION
6.   As stated above Fortis will have sole control over MeesPierson at the completion of the
     transaction. The operation therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of
     article 3(1)b of the Council Regulation 4064/89, of 21 December 1989 (the "merger
     regulation").
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.   The combined world turnover of the parties exceeds 5 000 million ECU (Fortis 16 366
     mECU, MeesPierson 1 575 mECU). The aggregate Community wide turnover of each of
     the undertakings is more than 250 mECU (Fortis 13 590 mECU, MeesPierson 1 353
     mECU). The undertakings do not achieve more than two thirds of their turnover in one
     and the same Member State. The proposed concentration has therefore a Community
     dimension but does not constitute a cooperation case under the EEA Agreement pursuant
     to Article 57 and Article 2 in Protocol 24 of that Agreement.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
     Relevant product market
8.   The Commission has traditionally divided banking services into three main sub-sectors:
     retail banking, corporate banking and financial markets (see Case No IV/342
     Fortis/CGER, Case No.IV/M.573 - ING/BARINGS, etc).The retail banking sector can be
     further divided into a number of product groups including current, deposits and saving
     accounts, certificates of deposit and other for the depositing customer. For the borrowing
     customer the products are, among others, current and loans accounts secured in different
     ways, import-export finance, consumer finance, credit cards and other services (Case No.
     IV/M.391 - BAI/Banca Popolare di Lecco). Corporate banking comprises financial
     services to corporate clients, including investment bank services such as M&A advice,
     underwriting of equity and debt issues (Case No IV/M.597 - Swiss Bank
     Corporation/S.G. Warburg). Financial Markets comprise money markets operations,
     foreign exchange trading and derivatives trading (Case No IV/M.596 - Mitsubishi
     Bank/Bank of Tokio).
9.   For the purpose of the present case it is not necessary to provide a definitive delimitation
     of the relevant product market since, on the basis of the assessment set out below, a
     dominant position would not be created or reinforced even on the narrowest product
     market definition.
                                           page 2

    Relevant geographic market
10. From a geographical point of view, the activities of the retail sector have been
    traditionally considered national in scope. The markets for corporate banking and for
    financial markets activities are essentially international in scope
    Assessment
11. Geographical overlap of activities only occurs in the Netherlands since MeesPierson's
    activities on the Belgian market are insignificant. As far as the retail banking is concerned
    the concentration will lead to an increase of activities of Fortis Bank Netherlands of one
    percent, thus reaching a share of activity of 6% of the Dutch banking system. It is
    estimated that ABN-AMRO, ING and Rabobank hold jointly approximately eighty
    percent of the Dutch banking system. Apart from these three banks some fifty other banks
    are active on the Dutch market.
12. In respect of other banking services, within the corporate banking and financial services
    activities, the acquisition of MeesPierson by Fortis will improve Fortis' position.
    However considering the low market shares achieved by the new entity (below 5% of the
    Dutch market) and its absence in most of the Member States in the banking sector, the
    position of the new entity at European level will be negligible. Further, the operation will
    put an end to the overlap of activities which exists at present between MeesPierson and
    ABN-AMRO. In view of the above, the operation does not raise serious doubts about its
    compatibility with the common market or the EEA Agreement.
V   ANCILLARY RESTRAINTS
13. The notifying parties have requested that the clauses and agreements described below be
    considered as ancillary to the concentration.
14. Article 17 of the Sale and Purchase Agreement provides:
            "17.1    Sellers undertakes -pro se and on behalf of any affiliate - for a period of
                     one year from Completion not to solicit or offer employment to, hire or
                     engage in any other capacity any of the Key Employees without prior
                     written consent of Fortis, and;
            17.2     Seller undertakes -pro se and on behalf of any affiliate - for a period of
                     three years from Completion not to use any information with respect to
                     clients of the Company and its Subsidiaries which it has at its disposal
                     either as a result of being the controlling shareholder of the Company or
                     obtained during the Due Diligence Investigation to entice away such
                     clients."
15. These provisions are considered necessary to enable the purchaser to take over the full
    value of the assets transferred. They can therefore treated as ancillary to the concentration.
                                            page 3

VI  CONCLUSION
16. It follows from the above that the proposed concentration would not create or strengthen a
    dominant position as a result of which competition would be significantly impeded in the
    common market or in a substantial part of it.
17. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified operation
    and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the functioning of the
    EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of Council
    Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                     For the Commission,
                                          page 4
