                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                Brussels, 21.11.2017
                                                                C(2017) 7871 final
In the published version of this decision, some                     PUBLIC VERSION
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
                                                              To the notifying parties:
Subject:            Case M.8640 - CVC / BLACKSTONE / PAYSAFE
                    Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council
                    Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the
                    European Economic Area2
Dear Sir or Madam,
(1) On 16 October 2017, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
     concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation by which CVC Capital
     Partners SICAV-FIS S.A. ("CVC", Luxembourg) and Blackstone Group L.P.
     ("Blackstone", USA) acquire within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger
     Regulation joint control of the whole of Paysafe Group PLC ("Paysafe", UK) 3. The
     concentration is accomplished by way of a public bid announced on 4 August 2017.
     CVC, Blackstone referred to as "Notifying Parties" and together with Paysafe as "the
     Parties".
1    OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
     the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
     replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
     the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2    OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
3    Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 358, 24.10.2017, p. 8.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

1.     THE PARTIES
(2)    The CVC Group provides advice to and manages certain investment funds and
       platforms.
(3)    Blackstone is a global alternative asset manager.
(4)    The Paysafe Group is active in the provision of online and mobile payment
       processing services.
2.     THE OPERATION AND THE CONCENTRATION
(5)    On 4 August 2017, the Notifying Parties announced their recommended cash
       offer for Paysafe, by way of a an announcement made pursuant to the City Code
       on Takeovers and Mergers (the "UK Takeover Code"), which constitutes a firm
       intention to make a public offer under the UK Takeover Code. The Parties will do
       so via a special purpose vehicle ("Bidco") which will be indirectly and jointly
       majority-owned by the Notifying Parties.
(6)    The transaction will be implemented by way of a court-sanctioned scheme of
       arrangement between the Paysafe and its shareholders, pursuant to section 152 of
       the Isle of Man Companies Act 1931. Following completion of the transaction,
       Bidco will hold 100% of shares Paysafe and the Notifying Parties will have joint
       control of Paysafe.
(7)    Paysafe is a FTSE 250 company listed on the London Stock Exchange. It has its
       own management, financial resources and independent access to the market on a
       lasting basis. It therefore constitutes a business with a market presence to which
       market turnover can be clearly attributed and hence, as clarified in paragraph 24
       of the Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice ("CJN")4, it constitutes an undertaking
       within the meaning of the Merger Regulation.
(8)    According to the transaction documents, the Notifying Parties will each appoint
       half of the directors of any board able to control Paysafe. Material decisions,
       including approval of annual budget and business plan, will require the approval
       of all directors nominated by each of the Notifying Parties. Accordingly, each of
       the Notifying Parties has an effective veto right over the strategic decisions of
       Paysafe.
(9)    Therefore, the notified transaction involves the acquisition of joint control over
       Paysafe by the Notifying Parties. As neither of the Notifying Parties did
       previously exert any form of control over Paysafe, the transaction qualifies as an
       acquisition from third parties pursuant to paragraph 91 of the CJN.5
(10)   In the light of the above, the notified transaction constitutes a concentration
       pursuant to Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
4    Commission Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice under Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 on the
     control of concentrations between undertakings (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
5    Commission Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice under Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 on the
     control of concentrations between undertakings (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
                                                      2

3.     EU DIMENSION
(11)   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
       more than EUR 5 000 million6 (CVC: EUR […], Blackstone EUR […], Paysafe:
       EUR 840 million). Each of them has an EU-wide turnover in excess of EUR 250
       million (CVC: EUR […], Blackstone EUR […], Paysafe: EUR […]), but they do
       not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one
       and the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has an EU
       dimension.
4.     COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
     4.1. Overview of Parties' activities
(12)   Paysafe is a global provider of end-to-end payment solutions. Paysafe's products
       and services are used by businesses and by consumers to connect and transact
       through payment processing, digital wallets, and online payment solutions, geared
       towards mobile initiated transactions, real-time analytics, and the convergence
       between bricks-and-mortar and online payments.
(13)   The transaction gives rise to two horizontal overlaps between Paysafe and New
       Day (a CVC controlled company), as both companies are active in (a) the
       provision of card issuing in the UK; and (b) the provision of personal loans in the
       UK.
(14)   New Day is a consumer finance provider in the UK. It issues store and credit
       cards and recently (since December 2016) entered the consumer finance sector by
       offering personal loans.
(15)   Moreover, the transaction gives rise to the following vertical relationships
       between Paysafe, active in the upstream provision of online payment services and
       three CVC controlled companies (Tipico, Sisal and Sky Bet), active in the
       downstream provision of online betting and gaming services in (a) Germany
       (Tipico); (b) Italy (Sisal); and (c) the UK (Sky Bet).
(16)   Tipico is a provider of online and in-store betting and gaming services. Tipico is
       predominantly active in Germany, but also in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Malta,
       Netherlands, and Sweden.
(17)   The Sisal group is a gaming and betting operator in Italy. Its primary activities
       include in-store retail gaming, including operating gaming machines, horse racing
       and sports betting at betting shops, and online gaming and betting services.
(18)   Sky Bet provides online betting and gaming services to customers in the UK, and,
       to a lesser extent, in Ireland, Italy, Finland, Gibraltar, Isle of Man and the Channel
       Islands.
6  Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation.
                                                       3

     4.2. Relevant markets
            4.2.1.     The provision of online payment services
(19)   The Commission has not yet reached a definite conclusion regarding the exact
       product market definition for mobile payments.7 For example it has left open
       whether mobile payments are in a separate product market than online payment
       methods (e.g. via the internet) and/or offline payments at the point of sale. It has
       also left open the issue of whether there are distinct narrower product markets for
       digital wallets and/or prepaid products.
(20)   The Commission has previously8 considered the geographic scope for the
       provision of online payment services as being wider than national in scope, but
       left open the exact geographic market due to the absence of competition concerns.
(21)   For the purposes of the present case, there is no reason to deviate from the above
       precedents. The transaction does not raise any competition concerns in the market
       for the provision of online payment services under any of the possible market
       delineations described above.
            4.2.2.  The provision of card-related activities
(22)   The Commission has distinguished three main card-related activities: (i) the
       issuing of cards to individuals and companies; (ii) card processing; and (iii) the
       merchant acquiring for card payment acceptance.9
(23)   Within the activity of issuing of payment cards, the Commission has considered
       that debit cards and credit/charge cards belong to separate markets.10 However,
       the Commission has left open whether the market can be further broken between
       pure "store" or universal credit cards, personal or corporate credit cards, domestic
       or international credit cards and card brand (Visa, Mastercard, American Express,
       etc)
(24)   The Commission has previously defined the geographic scope for the provision of
       card issuing services as being likely national in scope, but left open the exact
       geographic market due to the absence of competition concerns.11
(25)   For the purposes of the present case, there is no reason to deviate from the above
       precedents. The transaction does not raise any competition concerns in the market
       for the provision of card-related activities under any of the possible market
       delineations described above.
7  Case COMP/M.6967 – BNP Paribas Fortis / Belgacom / Belgian Mobile Wallet JV – 11 October 2013.
8  Case COMP/M.6967 – BNP Paribas Fortis / Belgacom / Belgian Mobile Wallet JV
9  Cases COMP/M.5241 – American Express/Fortis/Alpha Card; COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis;
   COMP/M.6164 – Barclays Bank /Egg credit card assets; M.7873 Worldline Equens
10 Cases COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis; COMP/M.6164 – Barclays Bank /Egg credit card assets.
   M.7873 Worldline Equens
11 COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortis; COMP/M.6164 – Barclays Bank /Egg credit card assets;
   M.7873 Worldline Equens
                                                  4

             4.2.3. The provision of consumer credit services
(26)   The Commission stated in the past12 that, at its most general, consumer credit
       consists of the supply of personal financing and other means of credit to
       individuals in order to purchase consumer goods as well as to finance
       consumption.
(27)   The Commission has also considered that the provision of card-based consumer
       credit should be viewed as a separate and distinct product market from personal
       loans, which loans sold directly via banks and consumer finance provided at the
       point of sale,13 although the Commission considered that it was not necessary to
       reach a definitive conclusion on market definition in that case.
(28)   For the purposes of the present case and given that the transaction does not raise
       any competition concerns, the exact product market definition for the provision of
       consumer credit services can be left open.
(29)   The Commission has previously found, with regard to retail banking services, that
       the geographic market for personal loans is generally national in scope due to the
       different competitive conditions within individual Member States and the
       importance of a network of branches.
(30)   For the purposes of the present case, there is no reason to deviate from the above
       precedents. The transaction does not raise any competition concerns in the market
       for the provision of consumer credit services under any of the possible market
       delineations described above.
           4.2.4.   The provision of gaming and betting services
(31)   The Commission has previously considered the market for the provision of
       gaming services,14 leaving open the question of whether different types of gaming
       and betting activities constitute a single product market or not.
(32)   The Commission has consistently taken the view in previous decisions that the
       geographical scope of betting markets is national due to differences in terms of
       demand across national territories and in the national regulatory systems, in
       particular with regard to the granting of licences.
(33)   For the purposes of the present case, there is no reason to deviate from the above
       precedents. The transaction does not raise any competition concerns in the market
       for the provision of online gaming services under any of the possible market
       delineations described above.
12 COMP/M.6164 – Barclays Bank /Egg credit card assets.
13 Cases COMP/M.7078 - Santander Consumer Finance / El Corte Ingles / Financiera El Corte Ingles;
   COMP/M.5384 – BNP Paribas / Fortiss.
14 Cases M.8058 - Novomatic / Lottomatica / JV; M.4114 – Lottomatica/GTECHs.
                                                    5

     4.3.   Competitive assessment
            4.3.1.   Horizontal overlaps
(34)   In the market for the provision of card-related activities in the UK, where both
       Paysafe and New Day are active in, Paysafe's market share is de minimis, (well
       below [0-5]%) and New Day's is below [10-20]%.
(35)   In the market for the provision of personal loans in the UK, the combined market
       shares of the Paysafe and New Day are negligible (less than [5-10]%).
(36)   Therefore no affected markets arise from these two horizontal overlaps.
            4.3.2.   Vertical relationships
(37)   On the upstream side of the market, online payment services, Paysafe's market
       share in all of the EEA Member States it is active in is below [0-5]%.
(38)   On the downstream side of the market the market shares of Sisal, Skybet and
       Tipico are under [10-20]% under almost all plausible product market definitions
       and geographic scopes, with the only exception of a possible sub-segmentation
       for the provision of betting activities in Germany, where Tipico has a market
       share of around [50-60]%.
                     4.3.2.1. Notifying Parties' view
(39)   The Notifying Parties submit that there can be no input foreclosure that is to
       restrict access to or the use of Paysafe's services to rivals of Tipico. Indeed,
       Paysafe's market shares in Germany are very low, below [0-5]%, which means
       that there would be plenty of providers of online payment services, or even other
       payment mechanisms, to which rivals of Tipico would be able to switch to.
(40)   Similarly, there can be no customer foreclosure that is to restrict access of rivals
       of Paysafe to Tipico. Firstly, online gaming operators do not represent a
       significant customer base for online payment services. Secondly, customers of
       online gaming companies prefer to have at their disposal a number of different
       payment methods, therefore a restriction to only Paysafe as a means of payment
       for its services would likely not be in Tipico's commercial interest.
                     4.3.2.2. Commission's assessment
(41)   The Commission, in agreement with the arguments put forward by the Notifying
       Parties, considers that post-Transaction, there would be no risk of either input
       foreclosure or customer foreclosure.
(42)   This is corroborated by the very low market shares of Paysafe in the German
       online payment services market (as far as a potential input foreclosure is
       concerned) and the modest part online betting services represent for the overall
       income of online payment services, as well as the existence of multiple payment
       methods customers of online betting services can use (as far as a potential
       customer foreclosure is concerned). The absence of potential customer
                                                   6

     foreclosure problems is also confirmed by the fact that none of operators active in
     payment services in Germany voiced any concern in that regard.
(43) In view of the above the Commission considers that no concerns arise from these
     vertical relationships.
5.   CONCLUSION
(44) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
     notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with
     the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of
     the Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                  For the Commission
                                                  (Signed)
                                                  Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                  Member of the Commission
                                             7
