                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                Brussels, 12.4.2018
  In the published version of this decision, some               C(2018) 2257 final
  information has been omitted pursuant to Article
  17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
  concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and
  other confidential information. The omissions are
  shown thus […]. Where possible the information
                                                                       PUBLIC VERSION
  omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
  general description.
                                                                To the notifying party:
Subject:            Case M.8764 - SEDGWICK / CUNNINGHAM LINDSEY
                    Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council
                    Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the
                    European Economic Area2
Dear Sir or Madam,
(1)       On 6 March 2018, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
          concentration pursuant to Article 4 of the Merger Regulation whereby Sedgwick,
          Inc ("Sedgwick", United States), indirectly solely controlled by investment funds
          affiliated with KKR & Co. L.P. ("KKR", United States), acquires sole control of
          CL Intermediate Holdings I, B.V. ("Cunningham Lindsey", United States) by way
          of purchase of shares3. Cunningham Lindsey, Sedgwich and KKR are referred to
          as "the Parties".
1.        THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
(2)       Sedgwick ("the Notifying Party") is a global provider of risk management
          solutions. Sedgwick is primarily focused on providing insurance-related services
          to insurers, self-insured corporations, governmental authorities, etc. On behalf of
1    OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
     the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
     replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
     the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
2    OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
3    Publication in the Official Journal of the European Union No C 95, 13.3.2018, p. 22.
Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

      its customers, Sedgwick manages, processes and audits various claims made by
      the insured. In the United States, Canada, United Kingdom ("UK") and Ireland,
      Sedgwick provides Third Party Administrator ("TPA") insurance claims
      management services and loss adjusting services.
(3)   Sedgwick is indirectly solely controlled by investment funds affiliated with KKR,
      which is a global investment firm. KKR offers a broad range of alternative asset
      funds and other investment products to investors and provides capital markets
      solutions for the firm, its portfolio companies, and other clients. Sedgwick
      operates in the United Kingdom under the name Vericlaim and in Ireland through
      OSG Outsources Services Group Limited ("OSG Vericlaim"). "Vericlaim" in the
      present decision therefore refers to Sedgwick subsidiaries
(4)   Cunningham Lindsey is a global provider of TPA insurance claims management,
      loss adjusting, loss consultancy and property reinstatement services. Its customers
      comprise insurers, reinsurance companies, insurance brokers, self-insured
      corporations, governmental bodies, etc.
(5)   Pursuant to the Share Purchase Agreement Sedgwick acquires 100 % of the
      issued and outstanding shares of Cunningham Lindsey. The transaction, therefore,
      constitutes a concentration within the meaning of Article 3(1) of the EUMR.
2.    EU DIMENSION
(6)   The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
      more than EUR 5 000 million4 (KKR: EUR […] million; Sedgwick: […] million;
      Cunningham Lindsay: EUR […] million). Two of them have an EU-wide
      turnover in excess of EUR 250 million (KKR: EUR […] million; Sedgwick: […]
      million; Cunningham Lindsay: EUR […] million), but they do not achieve more
      than two-thirds of their aggregate EU-wide turnover within one and the same
      Member State. The notified operation therefore has an EU dimension.
3.    RELEVANT MARKETS
(7)   The relevant markets to this transaction relate to the provision of outsourced
      insurance-related services. More specifically, the Parties' activities overlap in loss
      adjusting services and TPA claims management services in the UK and Ireland. 5
4   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation and the Commission
    Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice (OJ C 95, 16.4.2008, p. 1).
5   Cunningham Lindsey is also active in loss adjusting and TPA claims management in Belgium,
    France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Spain and Sweden where Vericlaim is not present. Vericlaim
    may however refer claims of global customers in these countries to partners companies (not
    controlled by or affiliated with any of the Parties) within a network called "the VRS Network". The
    overlaps between Cunningham Lindsey and the claims referred by Vericlaim however do not lead to
    any affected markets.
                                                        2

     3.1.   Product market definition
            3.1.1.     Loss adjusting
(8)    Loss adjusting services involve the provision of inspection services related to
       claims processing, which typically consist of sending an inspector to the site of
       the loss to assess whether the insurer is obligated to pay the insured (or a third
       party on behalf of the insured), to quantify the insurer’s exposure, and to
       determine whether the insurer can recover payment from a third party. Most field
       inspections are performed by third party loss adjusters (such as the Parties), but
       may be performed by an insurer or self-insured corporation using in-house claims
       inspectors. Claims that require field inspection range from small scale
       commercial or homeowner claims to large and complex industrial losses
       stemming from catastrophes and natural disasters.
(9)    In a previous case,6 the Commission indicated that from the perspective of supply
       and demand-side substitutability, loss adjusting services belonged to a separate
       product market from other insurance-related services. The exact product market
       definition was however left open because the transaction did not raise serious
       doubts as to the compatibility with the internal market regardless of the exact
       market definition.
Distinction by type of claims
(10)   The Notifying Party submits that there may be a distinction within loss adjusting
       services between property and casualty loss adjusting services. Property loss
       adjusting services relate to property insurance, which is a policy that provides
       financial reimbursement to the owner or tenant of a structure and its contents, in
       the event of damage or theft. Property insurance can be written for both personal
       property (e.g. homeowners and tenants) and commercial property (e.g. factories,
       goods, retail locations). Casualty insurance is mainly liability coverage of an
       individual or organisation for negligent acts or omissions.
(11)   The market investigation7 showed that the main loss adjusting service providers
       in the UK and Ireland are active both in casualty and property loss adjusting
       services, but have different business units to deal with each type of claims.
       Smaller loss adjusting companies seem to be more specialised. They are generally
       active either only in property or only in casualty loss adjusting. Overall, the
       market investigation showed that property and casualty loss adjusting would
       require different skills, and that the legal and technical frameworks would vary.
(12)   Within property loss adjusting services, the market investigation showed that the
       vast majority of loss adjusting companies are active in both commercial and
       personal property, but some of them have separate business units for each
       business line. One competitor pointed to the specificities of commercial property
       claims, in terms of expertise and customers' preferences.8
6     See M.6752 - CVC/Cunningham Lindsey Group (para. 10-14).
7     Replies to questions 5 and 43 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
8     A reply to question 44.1.1 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                        3

Distinction between in-house and external loss adjusting services
(13)   The Notifying Party submits that the loss adjusting market should include also in-
       house supply of these services, which would exert a significant competitive
       pressure on the merchant market.
(14)   The market investigation indicated that the decision to outsource loss adjusting
       services is mainly driven by costs efficiency and the need of (perceived)
       independence vis-à-vis the insurer for the insured. Numerous market respondents
       identified barriers to in-source, such as the need for sufficient volume, risks
       associated with human resources, lack of expert personnel and IT systems.9 Many
       customers indicated that they outsource entirely their loss adjusting needs to third
       parties, and some of them explained that in-sourcing would not be economical.10
Conclusion
(15)   In any event, for the purpose of the present case, the precise product market
       definition for loss adjusting services and in particular whether (i) a distinction
       should be made between property and casualty loss adjusting services, and within
       property, between commercial and personal property loss adjusting, and (ii) the
       relevant market should comprise also in-house loss adjusting services can be left
       open in this case, since the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
       compatibility with the internal market regardless of the exact product market
       definition.
            3.1.2.     TPA claims management
(16)   Claims management services involve the administration of insurance claims. TPA
       claims management service providers replicate all or part of an insurer's internal
       claims management process, including first notification of loss, initial analysis of
       claim and distribution to appropriate personnel for processing, negotiation and
       settlement, payment, providing management information and data, and recovery.
(17)   In a previous case,11 the market investigation of the Commission strongly
       indicated that from both a supply and demand-side substitutability perspective
       TPA claim management services belong to a separate product market. This was
       because, according to market participants, TPA claims management services are
       provided separately from other types of claims-related services.
Distinction by type of claims
(18)   The Notifying Party submits that TPA claims management services may be
       broken down into property (including commercial and personal property),
       casualty and motor lines, as it would require certain different skills. The Notifying
       Party however submits that the general process of providing TPA claims
       management services is similar for casualty, property and motor claims.
9  Replies to question 8 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
10 Replies to questions 4 and 43 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
11 See M.6752 CVC/Cunningham Lindsey (para. 15-19).
                                                       4

(19)   The market investigation showed that TPA claims management service providers
       tend to specialise in each type of claims, casualty, property or motor, and within
       property, personal or commercial. If some service providers are active in several
       segments, they will generally have different teams since it would require specific
       expertise.12
Distinction between in-house and external claims management services
(20)   The Notifying Party holds the view that in-house provision of claims management
       should be considered together with TPA insurance claims management, as it
       would exert a significant competitive pressure on the merchant market.
(21)   The market investigation indicated that the decision to outsource claims
       management is mainly driven by costs efficiency. Market respondents
       consistently identified IT tools and expert personnel as necessary capabilities to
       handle claims in-house.13
Conclusion
(22)   In any event, for the purpose of the present case, the exact product market
       definition for claims management services and in particular whether (i) a
       distinction should be made between property, casualty and motor claims
       management services, and within property, between commercial and personal
       property claims management, and (ii) the relevant market should comprise also
       in-house claims management services can be left open in this case, since the
       transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal
       market regardless of the exact product market definition.
     3.2.   Geographic market definition for loss adjustment and TPA claims
            management
(23)   In its previous decision,14 the Commission considered the markets for insurance
       claims-related services, among which loss adjusting and claims management,
       could be national or possibly limited to the UK/Ireland cluster.
(24)   The Notifying Party submits that the markets for loss adjusting and TPA claims
       management are national in scope. The Notifying Party argues that while there
       are no formal barriers to the movement of staff across national borders from a
       legal or regulatory perspective, the ability to speak the local language, legal
       requirements and a knowledge of local insurance law are key requirements for
       loss adjusting. The Parties consider there is typically a need (for reasons of costs
       and logistics) to maintain nationally located employees who can liaise locally
       with the customer and undertake site visits when field inspections are necessary.
       The Notifying Party adds that their respective entities in the UK and Ireland
       operate almost entirely as separate business, with different business models
       commercial strategies.
12 Replies to questions 26 and 43 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors as well as replies to questions 27
   and 44 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
13 Replies to questions 32 and 73 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
14 See M.6752 CVC/Cunningham Lindsey (para. 38-40).
                                                      5

(25)    The results of the market investigation on the geographic dimension of loss
        adjusting and claims management markets are not conclusive. While the majority
        of the competitors active in Ireland considers that the competition for loss
        adjusting and claims management services takes place at the level of the cluster
        UK and Ireland,15 the majority of UK competitors considers that the competition
        takes place at the UK level16. The results for customers of loss adjusting and
        claims management services show that one third of Irish customers purchases
        these services at the level of the cluster UK and Ireland, followed by a slightly
        smaller group which purchases them at the level of Ireland.17 The results of the
        UK customers mirror those of the UK competitors, i.e. a majority of UK
        customers purchases their loss adjusting services at the level of the UK.18
(26)    The market investigation also showed that there may be a distinction between
        Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK, since Northern Ireland claims are
        sometimes handled by the Irish organisation of suppliers19 and some customers
        select their suppliers for the Island of Ireland.20
(27)    In any event, for the purpose of the present case, the exact geographic market
        definition and in particular whether (i) the UK and Ireland should be considered
        together or separately and (ii) Northern Ireland should be in the same geographic
        market as the UK or as Ireland can be left open since the transaction does not
        raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market regardless of
        the exact geographic market definition.
4.      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
     4.1.   Loss adjusting
            4.1.1.     General description of the sector
(28)    Loss adjusting services are provided by the Parties mainly to insurers, but also to
        a lesser extent to brokers, self-insured companies and governmental authorities.21
(29)    Loss adjusting services are generally awarded in two ways: (i) providers can
        compete for a position on a customer’s “panel” of approved providers, or (ii)
15 Replies to questions 11 and 33 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
16 Replies to questions 49 and 70 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
17 Replies to questions 9 and 31 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
18 Replies to questions 48 and 71 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
19 Replies to question 1 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
20 Replies to question 1 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
21 In Ireland, insurers represent respectively […]% of Vericlaim's property TPA revenue, […]% of its
   property loss adjustment revenue and […]% of its casualty loss adjusing revenue. For Cunningham,
   the insurers make up respectively […]%, […]% and […]% of the described business lines revenue.
   In the UK, insurers represent respectively […]% of Vericlaim's property TPA revenue, […]% of its
   property loss adjustment revenue and […]% of its casualty loss adjusing revenue. For Cunningham,
   the insurers make up respectively […]%, […]% and […]% of the described business lines revenue.
                                                       6

       providers can be selected by a policyholder or broker, known as a “nominated”
       account.
(30)   A panel is a business arrangement whereby a customer, generally an insurer,
       enters into contracts with a fixed number of suppliers to perform certain loss
       adjusting work that it has decided to outsource to third party service providers.
       According to the Parties, insurers select loss adjusters for panel membership by
       inviting them to the tender process. Membership to a panel typically lasts three to
       five years before being re-tendered. Membership to a panel is however no
       guarantee of work.
(31)   The Notifying Party adds that, once on the panel, the panel members compete
       with each other in terms of the service they provide to the insurer. The prices or
       fees charged by a loss adjuster in a panel would be agreed upon before entering
       the panel.
(32)   The results of the market investigation indicated that the vast majority of panels is
       set up through tenders22 and that the average duration of such membership is
       indeed three to five years, with potential prolongations. In the market
       investigation, customers have suggested that the allocation of work is dependent
       on the customer. The majority of insurers tend to split the work between panel
       members as evenly as possible, taking into account several variables such as the
       expertise of the panel member, the type of claim to be treated, etc23.
(33)   On a nominated account, an insured or its broker typically names the specific loss
       adjusting firm to perform a certain service without that service provider having to
       be part of the insurer’s relevant panel. As explained by the Notifying Party, an
       insurance broker or the policy holder typically makes an individual request to the
       insurer that a particular loss adjusting firm be appointed to manage specific
       claims (thus “nominating” that firm).
            4.1.2.    Loss adjusting, Ireland
Market shares
(34)   The Parties and their main competitors' market shares for loss adjusting in Ireland
       are presented in the table below.
22 Replies to questions 5 and 44 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
23 Replies to questions 17 and 57 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
                                                       7


        by customers as Vericlaim and/or Cunningham Lindsey's closest suppliers in
        terms of capabilities and expertise.27
Alternative suppliers
(38)    According to the Notifying Party, the transaction will not impede effective
        competition as there are numerous alternative service providers.
(39)    The market investigation indicated that sufficient alternative service providers
        will remain post-transaction. Thornton, Davies and ProAdjust, among others,
        have been identified as credible alternative suppliers.28 These three companies are
        active in all market segments, including property (personal and commercial).29
(40)    The market investigation indicated that the smaller loss adjustment providers also
        exercise a certain degree of competitive pressure. While capacity is important for
        customers and may be required to handle large volume loss adjusting works (for
        example in relation to severe weather events)30, half of the customers include in
        the panels loss adjusting service providers irrespective of their size31, so that the
        panels comprise small and large companies32. Customers say that small loss
        adjusting service providers are also encouraged to apply for panel contracts and
        that they ultimately select the providers based on their expertise, the service
        offering, quality of service delivery, etc. In this respect, small players can be
        niche providers with specialist expertise addressing specific needs like for
        example related to high-risk casualty loss adjustment33.
(41)    The market investigation showed that customers' panels composition vary,
        although several of the main players in Ireland are generally present.34 One
        competitor noted that "[the merger] will not have an impact on price and very few
        panels all have the same adjusters but a mix of all 6 firms operating in Ireland.
        Insurers with smaller panels who currently use both Cunningham Lindsey and
        OSG Vericlaim have a choice to use another firm or substitute an adjuster".35
(42)    The market investigation also suggested that the Parties' competitors might
        increase their turnover post-transaction as customers generally multi-source
        through panels, so that post-transaction customers purchasing currently from both
        Parties may allocate more works to alternative suppliers. Competitors noted for
        instance that the transaction may have a positive impact for them as "we compete
27  Replies to question 22 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
28  Replies to question 20 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers. Also minutes with a competitor dated 22
    February 2018.
29  Replies to questions 5 and 6 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
30  Replies to question 12 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers and question 15.2 of Q2 - Questionnaire
    to Customers.
31  Replies to question 15 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
32  Replies to question 15.1 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
33  Replies to question 15.1 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
34  Replies to question 16 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
35  A reply to question 25 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                        9

       for panel positions where Cunningham Lindsey and OSG Vericlaim are chasing
       the same business"36 and "we think that some of the combined work of OSG and
       Cunningham Lindsey will become available for other companies".37 The market
       investigation indicated that a very significant proportion of loss adjusting works
       are awarded through panels38 and when asked whether they would need to
       organise a new tender should the transaction be completed, customers generally
       considered that it may not be necessary either because competition will remain
       within their panel or because the quality of the sevices provided by the current
       panel members should not be impacted by the transaction.39 Customers generally
       considered that the transaction should not impact the expertise or quality of
       services of the two companies (be they nominated or on a panel), while expertise
       and quality of services are being consistently identified as the most important
       capabilities.40 Quite the contrary, some customers considered that the merger will
       combine the Parties' skillsets and may therefore increase the companies' quality of
       services.41
(43)   The vast majority of customers considered that the transaction will not impact
       their purchases nor competition on the loss adjusting market as there is a
       sufficient number of credible alternative suppliers. The overall view is that "there
       is a good strength, depth and volume of alternative providers".42 On the personal
       property market more specifically, one customer noted that "Irish personal
       property market has evolved in recent years with introduction of higher policy
       excesses and introduction of no claims bonus leading to reduction in volume of
       smaller claims. Merger of Vericlaim & Cunningham Lindsey will have little
       impact on Irish market. Overall Irish market is small and served well by small
       number of providers".43
(44)   Only one competitor and one customer (out of 39 market respondents) identified a
       possible negative impact of the transaction on competitition or prices, mainly due
       to a reduction of choice. The competitor considers that there will be a reduction
       from 3 to 2 nationwide players. The customer considered that there could be a
       negative impact on prices as both Parties are among the (only) four loss adjusting
       service providers that participated to its last tender process for personel loss
       adjusting services. However, as explained above, the market investigation
       identified at least three other alternative suppliers of similar size and business
       model as the Parties, in particular for property (commercial and personal) loss
       adjusting services, namely Thornton, Davies and ProAdjust. The other
       competitive features of the loss adjusting markets detailed below further indicate
36 Replies to question 24.1.1 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
37 Replies to question 24.2.1 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
38 Replies to question 14 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
39 Replies to question 25 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
40 Replies to questions 12 and 13 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
41 Replies to question 24.1 and 24.2 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
42 A reply to question 23.1 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
43 A reply of a customer to question 24.1 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
                                                       10

       that the transaction will not significantly impede effective competition for loss
       adjusting in Ireland.
Barriers to entry and ability of competitors to expand their activities
(45)   The Notifying Party submits that barriers to enter and expand in the loss
       adjustment business are relatively low. There are no barriers associated with
       intellectual property, research and development, network effects or access to
       source of supply. The Notifying Party adds that scale is also not a barrier to entry,
       since being a credible loss adjusting service provider depends more on expertise
       and reputation.
(46)   The market investigation indicated that to be successful it is essential for loss
       adjusters to hire expert personnel. Having dedicated and experienced personnel
       seems to be the key criterion to be selected by customers.44 For this reason, if
       competitors were willing to expand their activities from casualty to property loss
       adjusting for instance, they would need to build some expertise and have
       resources to hire competent personnel. In that respect, the market investigation
       did not point to any restriction on staff movement. Local presence, scale or
       having historical datasets were consistently considered to be less crucial than
       expertise.45
(47)   In view of the above, the market investigation did not identify high barriers to
       entry or expansion in the loss adjusting business, except for the resources needed
       to hire expert personnel.
Barriers to switching
(48)   The Notifying Party considers that customers can easily switch suppliers, as the
       latter do not have any guaranteed volumes under their contracts. In addition,
       customers regularly organise new bidding processes. Vericlaim and Cunningham
       Lindsey argue that respectively […]% and […]% of their turnover from loss
       adjusting is annually up for rebid in Ireland.
(49)   In Ireland, customers generally grant contracts of a limited duration (3 to 5 years)
       to several suppliers, after a competitive tendering process.46 The market
       investigation also indicated that being on a panel or having a contract is not a
       guarantee of work. Within panels, customers generally have latitude on how to
       allocate work within the panel47 and reserve their right to purchase outside of that
       panel.48 Customers therefore generally remain free to decide which company they
44 Replies to question 9 of Q1 – Questionnaire to Competitors and questions 11, 12 and 13 of Q2 –
   Questionnaire to Customers.
45 Replies to question 5 of Q1 – Questionnaire to Competitors.
46 Replies to question 16 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers and question 17 of Q1 – Questionnaire to
   Competitors.
47 Replies to question 18 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors and question 17 of Q2 - Questionnaire to
   Customers.
48 Replies to question 20 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors and question 19 of Q2 - Questionnaire to
   Customers.
                                                     11

       want to use for each claim or to appoint new loss adjusting service providers as
       they wish.
(50)   In view of the above, the market investigation showed that customers can easily
       and swiftly switch between loss adjusting suppliers in Ireland.
Negotiating power of customers
(51)   The Notifying Party submits that loss adjusting customers in Ireland are
       sophisticated buyers that dictate price to their service providers.
(52)   The market investigation seems to indicate that a limited number of large
       insurance companies represents a high proportion of the Irish demand for loss
       adjusting services.49
(53)   In addition, as indicated above, a large proportion of the market is attributed
       through panels, after a competitive tendering process. The market investigation
       indicated that through this process, insurance companies can compare the
       proposed loss adjusters' prices against each other, and may obtain a similar fee
       scale for all panellists.50 As detailed above, customers can also generally appoint
       (new) loss adjusting companies other than their preferred supplier(s).
(54)   These competitive dynamics tend to confirm that the Parties' ability to raise prices
       post-transaction would be rather limited.
(55)   The competitive assessment of the market for loss adjustment in Ireland above
       remains the same irrespective of whether or not Northern Ireland should be
       considered as part of the same geographic market as Ireland because (i) the
       market shares of the parties do not materially change, and (ii) the same
       competitive dynamics are observed.
Conclusion
(56)   In light of all the above, and in particular in view of the alternative loss adjusting
       service providers who will remain post-transaction and the competitive dynamics
       on the demand-side, the Commission concludes that the transaction does not raise
       serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market for loss adjusting
       services in Ireland. The same conclusion applies if loss adjusting services in the
       United Kindgom are included in the same geographical market as Ireland
       because, as further explained in the part 4.1.3 below, (i) the market shares of the
       Parties would be lower and (ii) the same competitive dynamics are observed.
            4.1.3.    Loss adjusting, United Kingdom
Market shares
49 The Top 5 customers represent a high proportion of loss adjusters' revenues (replies to question 4.1 of
   Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors). Also minutes of a conference call with a competitor dated 16
   February 2018.
50 Replies to question 19 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors and question 18 of Q2 - Questionnaire to
   Customers.
                                                     12


        investigation also indicated that Vericlaim is a smaller player, which would be
        more specialised in high value/low volume claims.53
(60)    To support their claim that the Parties are not close competitors in the United
        Kingdom, the Notifying Party adds that of all the panels ([…]) in which either of
        the Parties participated, only in […] both of them were present. The Notifying
        Party specified that the same is true when the panels are considered separately for
        each of the subsegments. The market investigation did not identify the Parties as
        being particularly close competitors to each other. When asked to define the
        closest competitor to the each of the Parties, only a minority of customers refers
        to the Parties as each other closest competitors and Crawford is often mentioned
        as Cunningham Lindsey's closest supplier54.
Alternative suppliers
(61)    According to the Notifying Party, the transaction will not impede effective
        competition as there are numerous alternative service providers.
(62)    The market investigation indicated that sufficient credible alternative suppliers
        would remain. The vast majority of UK customers does not foresee an impact of
        the proposed Transaction on the loss adjusting services purchased by their
        company in the UK55, or on the loss adjustment market in the UK in general56.
        The vast majority of UK customers indicated that even post transaction, sufficient
        alternative loss adjusters would remain available on the market. When asked
        whether they would launch a new tender to try and select an additional panel
        member (if both Parties are current panel members), the majority of customers
        responded that it is currently not being considered57.
(63)    Small loss adjusting service providers also exercise a certain degree of
        competitive pressure. While capacity is important for customers and may be
        required to handle large volume loss adjusting works, approximately one third of
        the customers include loss adjusting service providers in their panels irrespective
        of their size. Customers say that they ultimately select the providers based on
        their expertise, the service offering, quality of service delivery, etc. In this
        respect, small players can be niche providers with specialist expertise58.
(64)    Only two competitors and two customers (out of 53 market respondents)
        identified a possible negative impact of the transaction on competition and on
        prices. One customer considered that the choice of large providers might be
        limited post-transaction and the other customer pointed to the risk that other
52  Replies to question 60 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers. Also minutes of a conference call with a
    customer dated 20 February 2018.
53  Replies to questions 60 and 61 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers. Also minutes of conference calls
    with customers dated 20 February 2018 and 22 February 2018.
54  Replies to question 62 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
55  Replies to question 64.1 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
56  Replies to question 64.2 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
57  Replies to question 65 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
58  Replies to question 52, 55, 55.1 and 55.2 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
                                                        14

       competitors may have difficulties to compete with the (large) combined entity.
       The two competitors considered that the transaction may reduce capacity and
       competition, narrowing choice for customers.59 However, one of the competitors
       referring to a potentially reduced choice for customers also indicated that they
       considered it likely for Vericlaim to focus more on high volume claims,
       effectively providing opportunities for smaller emerging firms. Furthermore, as
       indicated above, the market investigation identified several credible alternative
       suppliers, including one of the same size as the combined entity, Crawford. More
       importantly, the market investigation showed that Vericlaim's presence is limited
       and the Parties' activities are rather complementary. The other competitive
       features of the loss adjusting markets detailed below further indicate that the
       transaction will not significantly impede effective competition for loss adjusting
       in the United Kingdom.
Barriers to entry and ability of competitors to expand their activities
(65)   In analogy with the loss adjustment market in Ireland, the Notifying Party submits
       that barriers to entry and expansion in the UK loss adjustment business are
       relatively low. There are no barriers associated with intellectual property, research
       and development, network effects or access to source of supply. The Notifying
       Party adds that scale is also not a barrier to entry, since being a credible loss
       adjusting service provider depends more on expertise and reputation.
(66)   The market investigation indicated that to be successful it is essential for loss
       adjusters to hire expert personnel. Having dedicated and experienced personnel
       seems to be the key criterium to be selected by customers.60 For this reason, if
       competitors were willing to expand their activities from casualty to property loss
       adjusting for instance, they would need to build some expertise and have
       sufficient resources to hire competent personnel. Local presence, scale or having
       historical datasets were generally considered to be less crucial than expertise.61
(67)   In view of the above, the market investigation did not identify high barriers to
       entry or expansion in the loss adjusting business, except for the resources needed
       to hier expert personnel.
Barriers to switching behaviour
(68)   The Notifying Party submits that working with panels allows customers to easily
       re-allocate panel work and/or add additional providers to these panels if they
       would have concerns about the merged entity's market position. The Parties also
       argue that, due to the fact that prices charged by the different panel members are
       relatively similar, insurers are indifferent when awarding work.
(69)   The results of the market investigation seem to suggest that the prices within a
       panel are relatively similar for the same type of work. If specialist work is
59 Replies to questions 63 and 64 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers and question 61 of Q1 –
   Questionnaire to Competitors.
60 Replies to question 47 of Q1 – Questionnaire to Competitors and questions 51, 52 and 53 of Q2 –
   Questionnaire to Customers.
61 Replies to question 47 of Q1 – Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                     15

       required, different pricings can be agreed62. The market investigation also
       suggests that insurers try to split the work as evenly as possible between panel
       members, unless specific characteristics of the claims (such as geographical
       location of the claimant, expertise needed to address the claim, etc.) does not
       allow for such an even split. It should also be noted that next to working with
       panels, customers can also appoint additional loss adjusters to do loss adjustment
       work outside of a panel, creating additional competition for the panel members.
       According to the results of the market investigation, the majority of customers
       actively purchases loss adjusting services from suppliers outside of their approved
       panels.63
(70)   In view of the above, the market investigation showed that customers can easily
       and swiftly switch between loss adjusting suppliers in the United Kingdom.
Negotiation power of customers
(71)   The Notifying Party submits that the Parties do not have the ability to raise prices,
       referring to customers' possibilities to discipline attempted price increases or
       reductions in service levels by switching supplier or threathening to do so.
(72)   As described above, the majority of panels is composed through the use of
       tenders. In such a tender process, loss adjusters have to submit an offer in the
       tender process, describing the services to be provided and a price range. The
       customers then engage in negotiations with the loss adjusters before selecting
       their final panel members. The market investigation has shown that the majority
       of customers considers prices for comparable tasks are rather similar among the
       loss adjusters represented in their panels.64
(73)   The market investigation has also shown that customers consider that price
       changes are rather infrequent and in the majority of cases dependent on the
       inclusion of additional services. However, when a loss adjuster proposes new
       prices, customers tend to engage in negotations with the loss adjuster. One
       customer indicated that "should a supplier initiate the discussion with an
       expectation of raising the price, then we would expect a detailed business case as
       a starting point to any discussion", while another customer stated that "any
       request for more substantive fee rises will be subject to open book analysis and
       negotiation (including rejection)"65.
(74)   Since alternative suppliers are active in the UK market, customers may have the
       possibility to discipline price increases, either by reallocating work among panel
       members or by simply attracting a completely new supplier of loss adjusting
       services.
(75)   These competitive dynamics tend to confirm that the Parties' ability to raise prices
       post-transaction would be rather limited.
62 See question 58 and subquestions of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
63 See question 59 of M.8764 – Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
64 Replies to question 58 and subquestions of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
65 See question 58.3 of M.8764 – Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
                                                     16

(76)    The competitive assessment of the market for loss adjustment in the United
        Kingdom above remains the same irrespective of whether or not Northern Ireland
        should be considered as part of the same geographic market as the rest of the
        United Kingdom because (i) the market shares of the Parties do not materially
        change, and (ii) the same competitive dynamics are observed.
Conclusion
(77)    In light of the above, and in particular in view of the alternative loss adjusting
        service providers who will remain post-transaction, the Commission concludes
        that the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
        internal market for loss adjusting services in the United Kingdom. As indicated
        the conclusion above for loss adjusting services in Ireland, the same conclusion
        applies if Ireland and the United Kingdom are considered to form part of the same
        geographical market for loss adjusting services.
     4.2.   TPA claims management
            4.2.1.    General description of the sector
(78)    TPA claims management present different competitive features compared to loss
        adjusting services.
(79)    First, customers seem to in-source more often, at least partially66 and the decision
        on whether to outcource certain claims is essentially based on costs and hiring
        expert personnel but not on considerations such as the need for (perceived)
        impartiality67.
(80)    In addition, TPA claims management contracts are generally granted with an
        exclusivity clause for a specific book of claims (as opposed to allocation of work
        within loss adjusting panels). Customers generally award TPA claims
        management contracts by tenders or nomination.68 Such contracts typically range
        from six months to five years in length, or may be open-ended.
            4.2.2.    TPA claims management, Ireland
Market shares
(81)    The Parties and their main competitors' market shares for TPA claims
        management in Ireland are presented in the table below.
66 Replies to questions 26 and 66 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
67 Replies to questions 26.2 and 66.2 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
68 Replies to question 67 of M.8764 – Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers. The preferred selection method
   of customers differs on the type of customer (e.g. an insurance company compared to a self-insured
   company or a government agency) or in general with the customers' preference for one method over
   the other.
                                                      17


          "Cunningham Lindsey’s TPA offering in Ireland is not of a size that it would have
          a significant impact on the TPA market." 70
  (84)    As to Vericlaim's market position, the Notifying Party noted that TPA insurance
          property claims management merchant market in Ireland is very small, EUR 3
          million (approximately 90% of the claims would be managed in-house) and that
          there is a high degree of customer concentration. This means that current market
          shares cannot be taken in isolation to assess the competitive strength of a supplier.
          In 2016 more than […]% of Vericlaims's turnover from property TPA claim
          management services was generated by […] customers. The same levels of
          customers concentration would exist on potential subsegments for TPA
          commercial property claims management and for TPA personal property claims
          management, in the latter with […] accounting for […]% of Vericlaim's total
          personal property claims management turnover. Losing […] customers to any of
          the Parties' competitiors would therefore result in a significant loss of market
          share for Vericlaim.
  (85)    The market investigation indicated that the market size is relatively limited, as
          customers insource TPA claims management to a large extent. Only three of the
          Irish customers entirely outsource TPA claims management.71 A vast majority of
          customers (around 70%) outsource only partially, meaning that they manage TPA
          claims also in-house.72
          Alternative suppliers
  (86)    The Parties claim that despite the high combined market shares post-transaction,
          the customers will continue to have ample choice of TPA claims management
          service providers and the merged entity will continue to face competition from
          significant remaining competitors.
  (87)    The market investigation indicated that despite the Parties' high combined market
          shares, sufficient choice would remain for all types of TPA claims management.
          The majority of the customers considered that there would be a sufficient number
          of credible alternative providers.73 Other competitors for TPA claims
          management often cited by customers include Thornton and Davies.74 In addition,
          the small TPA claims management service providers also exercise a degree of
          competitive pressure. While resource capacity and systems capabilities are
          required for handling high volume contracts (i.e. contracts with a large number of
          claims) 75, important criteria based on which customers select their provider are
          the specific expertise ans staff competency, quality of service and price. In this
  70   A reply to question 40.2.1 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
71     Replies to question 26 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
72     Repies to question 26 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
73     Replies to question 39 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers. Only one customer considered that
       competition may be be reduced post- transaction.
74     Replies to question 36 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
75     Reply to question 31.1 of Q1 - Questionnaire to Competitors.
                                                          19

          respect, small providers can also be competitive as niche players76. Customers
          did not point out any impact of the transaction on their own purchases.
  (88)    Only one competitor and one customer (out of 21 market respondents) identified a
          possible negative impact of the transaction on competition. The competitor
          mentioned a reduction in capacity and competition. The customer considered that
          the market will lose a significant player (this customer does not currently
          purchase from Cunningham Lindsey). However, as explained above, the market
          investigation showed that alternative credible suppliers will remain in Ireland, and
          in particular Thornton which is of a similar size as Vericlaim for commercial TPA
          claims management, and that these alternatives would be sufficient in light of the
          small size of the Irish market. The other competitive features of the TPA claims
          management market detailed below further indicate that the transaction will not
          significantly impede effective competition for TPA claims management in
          Ireland.
  Barriers to entry and ability of competitors to expand their activities
  (89)    The Notifying Party submits that barriers to enter and expand in the TPA claims
          management sector are low and that competitors recently expanded their presence
          in Ireland. In particular, DWF which was active in the UK acquired Triton to
          expand its presence in Ireland.
  (90)    The market investigation indicated that the most important cababilities for TPA
          claims management are expertise, experience and good claims handling
          systems.77 For this reason, if competitors were willing to expand their activities
          from casualty to property TPA claims management for instance, they would need
          to build some expertise and hire competent personnel. As to geographical
          expansion, the market investigation pointed out to some regulatory specificities in
          Ireland, where the market is regulated to the Central Bank of Ireland. Several
          customers and competitors nevertheless indicated that they purchase or compete
          for TPA claims management at the level of both the UK and Ireland together.78
  (91)    In view of the above, the market investigation did not identify high barriers to
          entry or expansion in TPA claims management, except for having good claims
          handling systems and resources to hire expert personnel.
  Negotiating power of customers, barriers to switch and ability to in-source
  (92)    The Notifying Party submits that TPA claims management customers in Ireland
          are sophisticated buyers that do most of their claims handling in house and can
          effectively discipline price to their service providers. The Notifying Party
          specifies that in Ireland approximately 90% of claims would be managed in-
          house. The Notifying Party adds that customers can easily switch suppliers, as the
          the contracts are usually subject to termination with short notice (thirty or ninety
          days) and not subject to penalties. In Ireland, Vericlaim estimates that […]% of
76     Replies to question 34 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
  77 Replies to question 30 of Q1 – Questionnaire to Competitors and questions 33, 34 and 35 of Q2 –
     Questionnaire to Customers.
  78 Replies to 33 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
                                                         20

        its annual turnover from TPA claims management up for rebid annually. Given
        the relatively small size of the market in Ireland, even where some works is
        moved to a competitor, the incumbent would be likely to continue serving the
        same customer for other portfolios.
(93)    The market investigation indicated that the vast majority of customers at least
        partially insource claims management and some insurers fully insource claims
        management.79 Several customers stated that the higher value or more complex
        claims would preferably be dealt with internally, while high volume/low value
        claims would be outsourced.80 In addition, one customer indicated that it recently
        moved certain claims to another TPA claims management service provider.81
(94)    The customers' ability to in-source or change supplier tend to further limit the
        Parties' ability to raise prices post-transaction.
(95)    The competitive assessment of the market for TPA claims management in Ireland
        above remains the same irrespective of whether or not Northern Ireland should be
        considered as part of the same geographic market as Ireland because (i) the
        market shares of the Parties do not materially change, and (ii) the same
        competitive dynamics are observed.
        Conclusion
(96)    Taking into account Cunningham Lindsey's small market position, the number of
        alternative service providers available and the competitive dynamics on the
        demand side, the Commission concluded that the transaction does not raise
        serious doubts as to its compatibility with the internal market for TPA claims
        management services in Ireland. The same conclusion applies if TPA claims
        management services in the United Kindgom are included in the same
        geographical market as Ireland because, as further explained below, (i) the market
        shares of the Parties would be lower and (ii) the same competitive dynamics are
        observed.
             4.2.3.     TPA claims management UK
(97)    For TPA claims management in the United Kingdom, based on the Notifying
        Party's estimate, the transaction leads to only one affected market for the sub-
        segment of commercial property TPA insurance claims management.
(98)    The combined market share of the Parties commercial property TPA insurance
        claims management is [20-30]% in value in 2016) and the increment brought by
        Vericlaim's market share is small ([0-5]% in value in 2016).82
79 Replies to question 26 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
80   Replies to question 26.3 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
81   Replies to question 29.1 of Q2 – Questionnaire to Customers.
82   The Parties' market shares are similar (i) over the last three years and (ii) even if Northern Ireland is
     excluded. The Parties' market shares would be even lower if in-house claims management figures
     were included.
                                                         21

(99)    Other competitors for commercial property TPA insurance claims management
        include the market leader Crawford, and Davies which is close to Cunningham
        Lindsey in terms of market share.
(100) The market investigation has indicated that the Parties will face competition from
        many alternative suppliers post-transaction and that they are not particularly close
        competitors to each other. When asked about their views on the closest
        competitors to the Parties, customers' replies show that there are no clear closest
        competitors in the market for TPA insurance claims management83. Nearly all of
        the customers consider that sufficient alternatives for TPA insurance claims
        management would remain available in the market post-transaction.84 The vast
        majority of customers does not foresee an impact on the TPA insurance claims
        market in the UK in general, nor on the TPA insurance claims they purchase.85.
(101) In light of the above, and in particular in view of the Parties' limited market
        position and the presence of alternative TPA claims management providers, the
        Commission concludes that the transaction does not raise serious doubts as to its
        compatibility with the internal market for claims management services in the
        United Kingdom.
5.      CONCLUSION
(102) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
        notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with
        the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of
        the Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                              For the Commission
                                                              (Signed)
                                                              Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                              Member of the Commission
83   Replies to question 79 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers.
84 Replies to question 80 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers
85 Replies to questions 81.1 & 81.2 of Q2 - Questionnaire to Customers
                                                       22
