                                   EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                                                   Brussels, 8.5.2018
In the published version of this decision, some                    C(2018) 2988 final
information has been omitted pursuant to Article
17(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
concerning non-disclosure of business secrets and                           PUBLIC VERSION
other confidential information. The omissions are
shown thus […]. Where possible the information
omitted has been replaced by ranges of figures or a
general description.
                                                                   To the notifying parties:
   Subject:             Case M.8888 - APOLLO MANAGEMENT / CYPRUS
                        COOPERATIVE BANK / ALTAMIRA CYPRUS
                        Commission decision pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) of Council
                        Regulation No 139/20041 and Article 57 of the Agreement on the
                        European Economic Area2
   Dear Sir or Madam,
   (1)       On 11 April 2018, the European Commission received notification of a proposed
             concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 by
             which Altamira Asset Management S.A. ("Altamira", Spain), controlled by
             Apollo Capital Management, L.P. ("Apollo", US), and Cyprus Cooperative Bank
             ("CCB", Cyprus) acquire within the meaning of Articles 3(1)(b) and 3(4) of the
             Merger Regulation joint control of the newly created full-functional joint venture
             Altamira Asset Management (Cyprus) Ltd ("Altamira Cyprus", Cyprus). Apollo
             and CCB are collectively referred to as "the Parties".
   1.        THE OPERATION
   (2)       CCB is only active in Cyprus. It provides retail banking, corporate banking and
             bancassurance3 products to natural persons and legal entities residing in Cyprus.
   1     OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1 (the 'Merger Regulation'). With effect from 1 December 2009, the Treaty on
         the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') has introduced certain changes, such as the
         replacement of 'Community' by 'Union' and 'common market' by 'internal market'. The terminology of
         the TFEU will be used throughout this decision.
   2     OJ L 1, 3.1.1994, p. 3 (the 'EEA Agreement').
   3     Bancassurance is an arrangement between a bank and an insurance company allowing the insurance
         company to sell its products to the bank's client base.
   Commission européenne, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Bruxelles, BELGIQUE
   Europese Commissie, DG COMP MERGER REGISTRY, 1049 Brussel, BELGIË
   Tel: +32 229-91111. Fax: +32 229-64301. E-mail: COMP-MERGER-REGISTRY@ec.europa.eu.

           It also provides real estate finance only in the form of banking loans. CCB does
           not take on any risk in connection with bancassurance products.
(3)        Altamira is active in the management, enforcement and recovery of delinquent
           loans, and the management and sale of foreclosed real estate. In particular,
           Altamira provides banks with debt servicing covering the whole debt cycle of a
           non-performing loan, from pre-legal action to the sale of seized collateral. This
           activity is also called debt management. Altamira is controlled by Apollo, a group
           of global investment funds that invest in a wide range of industries. Altamira is
           active in Cyprus only through Altamira Cyprus which provides its management,
           enforcement and recovery of delinquent loans services exclusively for CCB by
           the management, administration, commercialisation and disposal of assets that
           CCB acquires when it seizes the collateral provided as security to the loans it has
           issued.
2.         THE CONCENTRATION
(4)        Altamira Cyprus was created on 24 January 2018. Investment funds managed by
           affiliates of Apollo own 51% of the shares. The remaining 49% is owned by
           CCB. Its original purpose was exclusively to service some of CCBs non-
           performing assets. These consisted of EUR […] million of CCB's non-performing
           loans4 ("NPLs") and EUR […] million of accounting write-offs5 at 31 December
           2017. Altamira Cyprus did not therefore fulfil the criteria determining full-
           functionality of a joint venture, since it served exclusively one of its parents.
(5)        On 13 April 2018, a resolution was adopted at the Altamira Cyprus' shareholders'
           meeting, pursuant to which the activities of Altamira Cyprus will be extended to
           include servicing of third parties' NPLs (i.e. NPLs not owned by CCB).
(6)        As a consequence of the resolution, Altamira Cyprus will become a market-facing
           service provider, as it intends to bid for the servicing of a substantial amount of
           NPLs. According to the information available, a number of important service
           contracts will be awarded in the course of the month of May 2018. According to
           the business plan submitted by the Notifying Parties, when these contracts are
           awarded to Altamira Cyprus, more than 50% of its turnover will be generated
           with third parties.
(7)        Moreover, Altamira Cyprus has sufficient own staff, financial resources and
           dedicated management for its operation and for the management of the NPLs
           under its responsibility (those of CCB and those of third parties). Furthermore, it
           intends to operate on a lasting basis. Therefore, Altamira Cyprus is fully
           functional.
(8)        Altamira Cyprus is also jointly controlled for merger control purposes, since both
           Parties have to agree on the annual budget and business plans of Altamira Cyprus,
           although Apollo alone decides on the nomination of the CEO.
4  Loans with arrears of more than 90 days past due
5 These are fully provided accounts taken off the balance sheet. As such, they do not appear in the official
  statistics of the country's NPLs.
                                                        2

(9)     Therefore, the transaction involves the acquisition of joint control of the newly
        created full-functional JV Altamira Cyprus by Apollo and CCB within the
        meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Merger Regulation.
3.      EU DIMENSION
(10)    The undertakings concerned have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover of
        more than EUR 5 000 million6. Each of them has EU-wide turnover in excess of
        EUR 250 million. CCB achieves more than two-thirds of its aggregate EU-wide
        turnover within one Member State (Cyprus), but Apollo does not. The notified
        operation therefore has an EU dimension.
4.      COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
     4.1. Introduction
(11)    The Parties submit that the criteria set out in paragraph 5(a) of the Commission
        Notice on a simplified procedure for treatment of certain concentrations under
        Council Regulation (EC) No 139/20047 ("the Commission Notice on a simplified
        procedure") are fulfilled.
(12)    The Parties are active in markets which are close and connected to each other,
        Altamira Cyprus' activities are in the management of NPLs and CCP's in retail
        banking activities, including mortgage loans. Consequently, the Commission has
        decided to apply paragraph 14 of the Commission Notice on a simplified
        procedure and revert to a normal procedure, in order to assess whether serious
        doubts arose as to the compatibility of the transaction with the internal market.
     4.2. Product market definitions
        NPL management services
(13)    In a recent decision, 8 the Commission used the term credit management services
        (CMS) to refer to a number of related services that may be required by companies
        which provide goods or services on credit. The main types of CMS that can be
        distinguished are: credit information and scoring, payment services, invoicing and
        debt collection. CMS can be carried out by the company itself as part of its own
        operations or can be outsourced to a third party.9
(14)    In the same decision,10 the Commission defined debt collection as a separate
        relevant product market, distinct from other credit management services. Debt
        collection can involve a range of different measures, all designed with the aim of
        achieving repayment of a debt. The main phases in the debt collection process are
        reminders, amicable collection, legal collection and debt surveillance. Debt
6   Turnover calculated in accordance with Article 5 of the Merger Regulation.
7    OJ C 366, 14.12.2013, p. 5.
8   Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraph 24.
9   Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraph 12
10  Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraph 24.
                                                        3

        collection is a regulated process, which can, in most countries, only be carried out
        be licensed providers.11
(15)    Altamira Cyprus is active in NPLs management services, whereby a client assigns
        NPLs to a company to service the assets by enforcing the creditor's legal rights
        and operating or selling the assets. As such, it is very similar to debt collection
        services.12
(16)    In its past practice the Commission also considered further segmentations of the
        debt collection market (which seems equally relevant for NPLs management
        services) either on the basis of the sector in which the creditor operates banks and
        financial institutions, telecoms companies, utilities companies, the public sector
        and SMEs)13 or according to the size of the creditor (large companies, such as
        major banks, telecoms and utilities, and smaller companies, SMEs, online
        retailers, etc.)14. Altamira Cyprus is only active in providing debt collection
        services to banks and financial institutions.
(17)    The Commission also analysed a possible distinction between non secured and
        secured loans15 for the purposes of debt collection services.16 The Commission's
        past decision discussed in the previous paragraphs related primarily to unsecured
        loans. The Commission noted that there were strong indications that collection on
        secured and unsecured debt may form distinct product markets, but ultimately left
        open the question as to whether the debt collection market should be segmented
        according to the security level of the loan. The reason was that for that case,
        financial institutions (which represented the main creditors in the area of secured
        debt) in the Nordic markets do not typically outsource collection on secured debt.
        As such, secured debt represents only a very small proportion of the overall
        external debt collection market.17
(18)    Finally, the Commission indicated that debt collection carried out internally (in-
        house) by the creditor should not be considered as part of the same market as debt
        collection that is outsourced to third parties.18
        Banking services and non-performing loans
(19)    The European Commission has held that banking services can be divided into
        four main segments: (i) retail banking (products supplied to individuals), (ii)
        corporate banking (with separate markets for small and medium-sized customers
11 Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraph 25
12 While in the present case the NPLs management services concern secured debts which are
   collateralised in M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB the companies involved were
   predominantly servicing unsecured debt (which is not collateralised).
13 Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraphs 35 - 44
14 Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraphs 44 -52.
15 A secured loan, is a loan in which the borrower pledges some asset (e.g. a car or property) as collateral
   for the loan, which then becomes a secured debt owed to the creditor who gives the loan
16 Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraphs 59 – 65.
17 Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraph 61.
18 Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraph 32.
                                                       4

        and large corporate customers), (iii) investment banking, and (iv) financial market
        services.19
(20)    Retail banking generally includes all banking services for individuals, including
        deposits, payment services, lending and investment products. The Commission
        has considered further distinctions for consumer loans20, card-based consumer
        credits21 and mortgage loans22.
(21)    Corporate banking generally includes banking services for large corporate
        customers and smaller commercial clients such as small and medium-sized
        enterprises. In particular, the precedents have recognised a market for loans
        granted to corporate customers.23 The Commission’s precedents have also
        considered separate product markets based on different corporate customer
        segments, i.e., large corporate customers and other corporate customers, including
        SMEs.24
(22)    In the present case, the relevant market is constituted by the provision of loans by
        banks and financial institutions, which – once they become NPLs –need to be
        serviced either by a bank in-house or by external service providers.
(23)    Furthermore, there is no need to conclude on whether the provision of loans by
        banks and financial institutions should be further segmented on the basis of their
        underlying loan characteristics (e.g. secured/unsecured, retail/SME/corporate)
        given that the transaction does not give rise to competition concerns under any
        conceivable market definition.
     4.3. Geographic market definitions
(24)    The Commission has defined the geographic market for debt collection as
        national in scope25.
(25)    The Commission has consistently held that the geographic scope of retail banking
        is national.26 This is due, amongst other factors, to the competitive conditions
        within individual countries and the “importance of a network of branches.”27
(26)    With regard to corporate banking, and in particular services to SMEs, the
        Commission has generally taken the view that these services are supplied at
        national level The Commission also noted, however, that some parts of corporate
19  Case M.6168 – RBI / EFG Eurobank / JV; M. 5726 - Deutsche Bank/Sal. Oppenheim; Case M.5384 -
    BNP Paribas/Fortis.
20  Case M.6405 BANCO SANTANDER/RAINBOW; Case M.6164 BARCLAYS BANK/EGG CREDIT
    CARD ASSETS; Case M.5432 - CREDIT MUTUEL / COFIDIS.
21  Case M.6405 - BANCO SANTANDER/RAINBOW; Case M.5384 BNP PARIBAS/FORTIS.
22  Case M.6168 – RBI / EFG Eurobank / JV.
23  Case COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO.
24  Case COMP/M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO Assets.
25  Case M.8287 Nordic Capital/Intrum Justitia AB, paragraph 85,
26  Case M.6405 – BANCO SANTANDER/RAINBOW; Case M.6168 – RBI / EFG Eurobank / JV
27  Case M.4844 – Fortis/ABN AMRO ASSETS.
                                                      5

        banking may have a wider geographic dimension, in particular services and
        products offered to large corporations.28
(27)    For the purposes of the transaction, the exact geographic market definitions may
        be left open since the transaction does not lead to competition concerns under any
        plausible market definition.
     4.4. Assessment
(28)    Altamira Cyprus is active in the market of NPLs management services and CCB
        in the market of loan provision by banks and financial institutions. As NPLs
        management services are provided only for NPLs (the latter being provided by
        banks and financial institutions) , it is not necessary to include all loans in the
        assessment.
(29)    Currently, the overwhelming majority of Cypriot NPLs (estimated at EUR 22 400
        million) held by large banks are managed in-house. Only two third parties are
        active (on a commercial basis) in the market for NPL management services in
        Cyprus: Debt Servicing Cyprus Ltd, which manages EUR 2 300 million of NPLs
        for the Bank of Cyprus, and Pepper Cyprus Limited, which manages EUR 800
        million of NPLs for Hellenic Bank. These two providers together manage loans
        worth a total of EUR 3 100 million, equivalent to around 14% of the total value of
        Cypriot NPLs. 29
(30)    CCB's NPLs amounted to EUR […] million at 31 December 2017, and the bank
        also had EUR […] million of accounting writes off. Their servicing is performed
        exclusively by Altamira Cyprus. Additionally, CCB holds EUR […] million of
        loans that are not yet NPLs but [may become so in the future]30. These loans are
        currently managed by CCB, but will be transferred to Altamira Cyprus once they
        are classified as NPLs.
(31)    Altamira Cyprus' provision of NPLs management services for CCB can be
        considered to constitute internal NPLs management within CCB, since prior to
        the Transaction Altamira Cyprus was not active on the market.
(32)    Therefore, looking at the current merchant market for the servicing of NPLs in
        Cyprus, the transaction will not have any impact on the structure of the market, as
        neither Altamira Cyprus is offering its services on a commercial basis, nor is CCB
        purchasing NPLs managing services on the commercial market.
(33)    Based on the available information, the merchant market for NPLs servicing is
        likely to undergo significant structural changes in the near future, with the
        servicing of sizeable NPLs portfolios moving from in-house to outsourcing.
(34)    According to information provided by the Parties, a portfolio of EUR […] million
        (or [30-40]% of all NPLs) currently held by Bank of Cyprus and a portfolio of
        EUR […] million (or 5-10]% if all NPLs) currently held by the Housing Financial
28  CaseCOMP/M.6168 – RBI/EFG Eurobank.
29 In the present case, given the recent development of the debt servicing market, the only available
   metric is the value of the NPLs.
30 These loans are currently in arrears, but less than 90 days past due. They become NPLs if they become
   more than 90 days past due.
                                                         6

       Corporation is likely in the near future to be outsourced to third parties,
       potentially including Altamira Cyprus.
(35)   The Commission considers that, even under this scenario, the Transaction does
       not lead to competition concerns in the markets for servicing NPLs in Cyprus.31
(36)   First, Altamira Cyprus has not been commercially providing NPLs management
       services to the market pre-transaction. Post-transaction, Altamira Cyprus intends
       to increase its customer base and offer its services to other suppliers of NPLs
       (banks and other financial institutions in Cyprus). Therefore a new NPLs
       management service provider will enter the market and offer its NPLs
       management services to customers willing to outsource these activities in the near
       future.
(37)   Second, pre-transaction Altamira Cyprus services the NPLs of CCB on an
       exclusive basis (i.e. Altamira Cyprus’s competitors did not have access to CCB's
       NPLs portfolio). This will not change as a consequence of the transaction.
(38)   The Commission notes that, in April 2018, the Cypriot government made a
       deposit of 2.5 billion euros in CCB. This deposit does not modify CCB's situation
       as regards NPLs or the JV's activities in the provision of NPLs management
       services. For the purposes of this decision it is not necessary or appropriate to
       determine whether or not this deposit to the JV partners involve the payment of
       state aid. The assessment that the present decision contains is entirely without
       prejudice to the Commission’s eventual position on the existence and, if relevant,
       the legality of such State aid.
(39)   In conclusion, based on the above elements, there transaction does not raise any
       concerns as regards its compliance with the internal market.
Conclusion
(40) For the above reasons, the European Commission has decided not to oppose the
       notified operation and to declare it compatible with the internal market and with
       the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article 6(1)(b) of
       the Merger Regulation and Article 57 of the EEA Agreement.
                                                           For the Commission
                                                           (Signed)
                                                           Margrethe VESTAGER
                                                           Member of the Commission
31 The assessment is carried out looking at the total NPLs market, but would be the same under any
   plausible segmentation of NPLs management services or NPLs portfolios.
                                                      7
