                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 12.06.1997
                                                                           PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                         MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                     ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                       To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject:        Case No IV/M. 919 - Abeille Vie/Viagère/Sinafer
                Notification of 6 May 1997 pursuant to Article 4 of Council
                Regulation No 4064/89
1.     On 6 May 1997, the Commission received notification of a proposed
       concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89, by
       which Abeille Vie/Société anonyme d’assurance vie et de capitalisation (“Abeille
       Vie”) acquires within the meaning of Article 3 (1) (b) of the Council Regulation
       control of the whole of Société d’Epargne Viagère - Société Anonyme
       d’Assurance Vie et de Capitalisation (“SEV”) and Sinafer SA, by way of
       purchase of shares.
2.     After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
       notified operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No
       4064/89, and does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the
       common market and with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I       THE PARTIES
3.     Abeille Vie is a wholly owned subsidiary of Commercial Union France SA
       (“Commercial Union France”) whose ultimate parent is Commercial Union plc
       (“Commercial Union”). Commercial Union France operates the French business
       of the group of companies owned by Commercial Union. The activities of the
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

     Commercial Union Group include the transaction of all classes of insurance and
     life assurance, other than industrial life. The Group also provides certain
     insurance-related financial services (including unit trust, investment management,
     banking, stockbroking, private client investment management) and invests in
     stocks and shares, properties, loans and mortgages, as well as trading in property.
     The principal activities of Abeille Vie are in the life assurance sector.
4.   SEV was founded in 1990 as a French registered public limited life assurance
     company (“société anonyme”). At present almost all the shares in SEV are held
     by Société Financière d’Epargne (“SFE”), which in turn is wholly owned by
     Compagnie de Suez SA (“Suez”). SEV’s entire business is derived from a co-
     insurance arrangement with Abeille Vie in respect of a group insurance policy
     with the Association Française d’Epargne et de Retraite (“AFER”).
5.   Sinafer SA, which will be created as a subsidiary of SFE within the Suez group
     for the purposes of the operation, will be incorporated immediately prior to
     closing as a French public limited company (“société anonyme”). It will be the
     successor to some of the businesses currently owned by Société d’Information et
     de Développement des Conventions AFER (“SINAFER SNC”), which is itself
     currently part of the Suez group.. Sinafer SA’s principal activity will be as an
     insurance broker whose sole purpose is to market, on a non-exclusive basis,
     AFER policies to the general public. SINAFER SNC’s broking activities in the
     Western part of France are carried out through a subsidiary. This subsidiary will
     also be transferred to Sinafer SA upon completion.
II    THE CONCENTRATION
6.   The operation involves Abeille Vie, acquiring sole control of both SEV and
     Sinafer SA from SFE, and hence from the Suez group The transaction is
     effectively the last stage in the acquisition, begun in 1994, by Commercial Union
     plc, of Groupe Victoire from Compagnie de Suez. (The 1994 acquisition was
     also notified under the Merger Regulation as Case No IV/M.498).
7.   Abeille Vie will acquire 100% of the shares in Sinafer SA. It will acquire a
     73.06% shareholding in SEV, which, when added to its existing 1.94%, will give
     Abeille Vie a total of 75%. [...]1 of the remaining shareholding will be [...]1 held
     by minority shareholders, who [...]1 cannot exercise decisive influence over key
     decisions. This holding does not therefore give rise to control within the meaning
     of Article 3(3) of the ECMR, and the acquisition is to be treated as an acquisition
     of sole control.
III   COMMUNITY DIMENSION
8.   Commercial Union, in its financial year ending 31 December 1996, had a world-
     wide turnover based on gross premium income in excess of ECU 11 billion and a
     Community-wide turnover in excess of ECU 8 billion. SEV in its financial year
     ending on 31 December 1996, had a turnover based on gross premium income in
     excess of ECU 1 billion, all of it arising in France. The turnover represented by
1   Deleted for publication
                                             2

    the activities of SINAFER SNC to be transferred to Sinafer SA, in the financial
    year ending on 31 December 1996, was in excess of ECU [...]1 million, all of it
    achieved in France. Although SEV and Sinafer achieve all their turnover within
    one and the same EU member state, there is no one EU member state in which
    the Commercial Union group achieves more than two-thirds of its EU-wide gross
    premium income. Therefore the concentration has a Community dimension
    under Article 1(2) of the Merger Regulation.
IV   COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
A.   Relevant Product Market
9.  The parties submitted that the relevant product markets for the purpose of
    assessing the case must be defined by reference to the activities within the
    insurance market of the two target companies.
     The activities of SEV
10. SEV’s business is derived from a co-insurance arrangement with Abeille Vie in
    relation to AFER (Association Française d’Epargne et de Retraite). AFER is a
    non-profit making association of members, who contribute agreed regular sums
    to the AFER fund. The AFER product is a savings related life product. During
    the term of the policy, interest, capitalisation and bonuses accrue which are repaid
    only on the death of the policy holder. AFER itself subscribes to a group
    insurance policy with Abeille Vie and SEV. This arrangement provides AFER
    with the capital to support the business, provide solvency, and makes available
    the technical capacity to control and invest the payments of its members.
11. The widest market definitions proposed were based on the type of risk covered,
    i.e. the life insurance market as a whole. Narrower definitions would have
    involved separate segments based on the characteristics of particular products,
    with the narrowest definitions of all based on the type of payment made by the
    investor. In the narrowest definition the relevant AFER products would fall
    within a ‘versement libre’ category. Since even on this narrowest market
    definition, no significant competition concerns arise, theprecise market definition
    can be left open.
     The activities of Sinafer
12. Sinafer’s only activity will be to market AFER policies on a non-exclusive basis
    to the general public. It was proposed that the appropriate product market was
    the market for distribution of life insurance products. In principle, various
    narrower segmentations could be envisaged: for example, distinctions could be
    drawn between the different methods of distribution, (eg direct sale, or sale
    through agents, brokers or other intermediaries), or the breakdown of distribution
    arrangements for individual products. However, as no significant competition
    concerns arise in the present case, the precise product market definition can be
    left open.
                                            3

B.   Relevant Geographic Market
13. The parties contend that the relevant geographic market for Sinafer SA’s
    activities is France, possibly extending to French-speaking Belgium, but no
    further. The market for SEV’s activities may be wider than France. However,
    since no competition concerns arise when the market isgeographically limited to
    France, it has not been necessary to decide whether the market is wider than
    France.
C.   Assessment
     SEV
14. Although Abeille Vie will be acquiring sole control of SEV, there are already
    links between the companies because of the arrangements between them in
    respect of the AFER product. The strategic management of AFER is carried out
    by a management committee comprised of two individuals directly elected by the
    policy-holder members of AFER. However, the day-to-day contract
    administration, is carried out by a Groupement d’Intérêt Economique (GIE) in
    which AFER, Abeille Vie and SEV are members. The management committee
    retains control of AFER because it has the power to dismiss GIE AFER.
    Although the acquisition of SEV will effectively give Abeille Vie control over the
    GIE, and hence over day-to-day contract administration, the independence of
    AFER will continue to be assured by the powers of the management committee,
    which remain unchanged. The actual fund management for AFER is already
    carried out by Abeille Vie, so the acquisition of SEV would not imply any change
    in existing arrangements.
15. According to the parties the main impact of the operation will be that Abeille Vie
    will bear the sole underwriting risk in respect of the AFER product. But in
    practice Abeille Vie already bears some 80% of the underwriting risk, even
    though the co-insurance arrangements specify a 50/50 underwriting ratio. This is
    because the 50-50 ratio only applied to premium income received from 1 October
    1994 onwards, and due to the large amount of previous income, the overall ratio
    of underwritten risk borne by Abeille Vie is about 80%.
16. Other than Abeille Vie, Commercial Union France has no further existing
    subsidiaries active on the life assurance market in France.
17. The narrowest market definition proposed, ie a market for “versements libres”,
    would imply a total market for such products by value of some 150,000 million
    French Francs, of which the market shares being brought together by the
    operation would represent some 11% of new policies issued. On any of the wider
    definitions suggested the market shares would be much lower. The operation
    therefore does not give rise to any serious competition concerns, and thus the
    precise market definition can be left open.
     Sinafer SA
18. SINAFER SNC exists only to distribute the AFER product in France. Sinafer
    SA, its successor to the business concerned, will be only one of a number of
    distribution outlets for AFER products. Practically all Commercial Union’s
                                           4

    distribution/brokering of life insurances in France are carried out through Abeille
    Vie and the Club Epargne controlled by it. Other distribution mechanisms are
    intermediaries such as Abeille Vie agents and brokers, financial intermediaries
    with a special relationship with AFER, regional banks and independent agents
    and brokers who include AFER products in their product range.
19. The main change brought about at the distribution level will be that one channel
    for the distribution of AFER products, namely Sinafer SA, will in future be
    owned by Abeille Vie. Sinafer SA will have therefore have an increased share of
    the distribution for the AFER product. The parties submit that the AFER product
    could in principle be distributed by anyone with the necessary skills in
    brokerage/distribution in the life assurance sector in France, and that the various
    distribution outlets compete vigorously with each other and, from a consumers’
    point of view, are highly interchangeable.. In any event the AFER product itself
    does not have such a strong position in the market that any competition concerns
    would arise about the distribution arrangements. As to Sinafer SA’s position on
    the market for the distribution of all life insurance products, its share based on to
    the value of sales by the top 100 brokers in France will be under [...]1. Its share
    of the total market will thus be smaller still.
VI CONCLUSION
20. In view of the above the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
    functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
    Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                             For the Commission,
                                            5
