                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 02.07.1997
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                      ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                    To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject : Case No IV/M. 949 - MEDERIC/URRPIMMEC/CRI/MUNICH RE
             Notification of 30.05.1997 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC)
             No 4064/89
1.    On 30 May 1997, the Commission received a notification of a proposed concentration
      pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/891 by which the
      undertakings: Médéric Prévoyance (“MEDERIC”), l’Union des Régimes de Retraites
      et de Prestations en Cas d’Invalidité et de Maladie des Industries Métallurgiques,
      Mécaniques, Electriques et Connexes (“URRPIMMEC”), CRI Prévoyance (“CRI”)
      and Münchener Rückversicherungs-Gesellschaft (“MUNICH RE”)acquire within the
      meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of the Council Regulation joint control over Prévoyance Re
      (“PREVOYANCE RE”), a joint venture company to be founded.
2.    After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the notified
      operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 and does
      not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with the
      functioning of the EEA Agreement.
1   OJ No L 395 of 30.12.1989; Corrigendum: OJ No L 257 of 21.09.1990, p. 13.
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

I. THE PARTIES
3.   MEDERIC, URRPIMMEC and CRI are “Institutions dePrévoyance” governed by the
     French Code of Social Security, and they provide accident, health and life insurance.
     MEDERIC is also active in the field of administration of collective funds and of all
     operations of a collective character as defined in the French Code of Social Security.
4.   MUNICH RE is a German company which provides reinsurance services throughout
     the world.
II. THE OPERATION
5.   MEDERIC, URRPIMMEC, CRI and MUNICH RE intend to establish a joint venture
     company, PREVOYANCE RE which will be active in the field of reinsurance,
     primarily in France.
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
6.   The combined aggregate worldwide turnover of the parties exceeds ECU 5,000
     million (MEDERIC about ECU 324 million, URRPIMMEC about ECU 152 million,
     CRI about ECU 109 million and MUNICH RE about ECU 15,471 million ). Each of
     two of the undertakings concerned has a Community-wide turnover in excess of ECU
     250 million (MEDERIC about ECU 324 million, and MUNICH RE about ECU
     12,046 million), but they do not achieve more than two-thirds of their aggregate
     Community-wide turnover within one and the same Member State. The notified
     operation therefore has a Community dimension.
IV.    CONCENTRATION
     Joint Control
7.   MUNICH RE will hold 34% of the shares in PREVOYANCE RE, and MEDERIC,
     URRPIMMEC and CRI will hold the remaining 66% through a holding company to
     be formed for this purpose and to be named Prévoyance et Réassurances S. A.
     (“PER”). MUNICH RE will be entitled to propose six (i.e. 25%) of the twenty-four
     members of the supervisory board, and decisions will be taken by simple majority.
     However, a number of strategic commercial decisions will require a majority of 75%
     plus one vote , for the approval of the annual budget, for the nomination of members
     and the president of the board of directors and for the designation of general directors.
     In addition, the Shareholders’ Agreement provides that certain operations will not be
     carried out without the prior consent of MUNICH RE, [...]2 . Therefore, despite the
     minority shareholding of MUNICH RE, and its minority representation at the
     supervisory board, MUNICH RE will be in the position to exercise decisive influence
     on the joint venture company jointly with PER..
     Autonomous economic entity
2   deleted for business secret
                                               2

8.  PREVOYANCE RE is a newly-created company with a life expectancy defiined in its
    statutes of 99 years. It is to be active in the field of reinsurance, and particularly the
    reinsurance of the following risks - life, sickness, accident and unemployment. It will
    be primarily active in France, where it is expected to seek its main customers from
    ‘institutions de prévoyance’ and other mutual-type organisations. It is proposed,
    according to the shareholders’ agreement, that PREVOYANCE RE will recruit and
    retain its own specialised staff, including an actuary, and that it will have its own
    Board, on which all shareholders will be represented, and an independent
    management structure capable of taking decisions on all everyday matters. It is also
    proposed that the parents will provide PREVOYANCE RE with initial capital of FF
    1m, to be increased to FF 100 m within 3 months of the date on which PER is
    registered.
9.  To enable PREVOYANCE RE to commence operations in the market as soon as
    possible after its formation, it is proposed that MUNICH RE will supply it, for an
    initial period, with certain specialised services, namely reinsurance know-how and
    technical assistance (eg for product development, formation of premium structures
    etc). In exchange for these services, PREVOYANCE RE is to be required to retrocede
    a proportion of its reinsurance business to MUNICH RE. This proportion is initially
    set at [...%]3 , reducing to [...%]4 when the amount ceded by PREVOYANCE RE
    reaches [FF ...]5 ., but subject to an overall minimum amount of [FF...]6 According
    to PREVOYANCE RE’s business plan the level of turnover at which the proportion to
    be retroceded reduces to [...%]7 is likely to be reached within between [.... ]8 and
    [...]9 years of the commencement of operations. Without prejudice to the question of
    whether the requirement for retrocessions should or should not be considered as
    ancillary to the concentration, such arrangements do not prevent the joint venture from
    being capable of playing an active role in the reinsurance market. Accordingly, and in
    the light of its other characteristics as described above, PREVOYANCE RE should be
    regarded as an autonomous economic entity for the purposes of regulation 4064/89.
    Coordination of competitive behaviour
10. Only one of the joint venture’s parent companies - MUNICH RE - is engaged in
    reinsurance, while other parents, represented within PER, are active in insurance. The
    Commission has taken the view in a number of previous cases (see below) that
    reinsurance is a separate product market. Accordingly the operation will not lead to
    coordination of competitive behaviour between the parent companies.
V. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
    A. Relevant product market
3  deleted for business secret
4  deleted for business secret
5  deleted for business secret
6  deleted for business secret
7  deleted for business secret
8  less than 10 years
9  less than 10 years
                                                3

11. PREVOYANCE RE will provide reinsurance cover. Among the parties to this
    concentration, only MUNICH RE is active in the reinsurance market. Reinsurance is a
    particular form of insurance. Its purpose is to spread risks between insurers. The
    reinsurer accepts either the whole or part of the direct risk insured by another insurer
    and thereby provides the primary insurer with the ability to increase the amount of
    insurance which he underwrites and to diversify his risk over time and geographic
    area. Reinsurance is traded between industry specialists, it is written only with other
    insurance companies, no premium income is derived from reinsurance sales to the
    public and no channels for retail distribution are required. For these reasons, the
    Commission has concluded in earlier decisions10 that it is necessary to distinguish
    between reinsurance and direct insurance.
12. Reinsurance can be divided into two sectors - life and non-life. The non-life sector can
    be further sub-divided into the following principal categories: liability, motor,
    accident/sickness, fire, marine, aviation and other. Although some reinsurers
    specialise in particular types of cover, there is no reason apart from expertise why a
    reinsurer should not readily enter the market in any sector; there is thus a high level of
    supply-side substitutability. Since even on the narrowest market definition no
    competition difficulties arise, the question whether reinsurance should be sub-divided
    can be left open.
    B. Relevant geographic market
13. Since reinsurance products are traded between industry specialists and not sold to the
    general public, controls by national authorities over the conduct of reinsurance tend to
    be much less extensive than those over direct insurance. This, together with the fact
    that reinsurance business can be readily conducted across national borders (e.g. by
    telephone), tends to indicate that the market has a global character. The existence of a
    world market is also evidenced by the presence of international broking firms which
    mediate reinsurance on a worldwide scale. Within the European Union freedom of
    establishment to provide reinsurance services was enacted by Directive EEC 225/64.
    The Commission has in earlier decisions11 considered the reinsurance market to be
    international or global.
      C. Assessment
14. PREVOYANCE RE will be active in the field of reinsurance primarily in France. As
    it is a newly created joint-venture without transfer of activities from the Parties, its
    turnover is zero. MUNICH RE is the only one of the parties to this concentration
    providing reinsurance services. MUNICH RE is the largest reinsurer worldwide in
    terms of premiums issued, however its share of the market is about[...%]12 and
    there are other significant competitors. In France, MUNICH RE achieves less than
    [...%]13 of its worldwide activities, in terms of gross premiums received. The joint
10      IV/M. 433 (ERC/NRG Victory); IV/M. 491 (General Re/Kolnische Re); IV/M. 600
        (Employers Reinsurance/Frankona Rückversicherungs AG); IV/M. 601 (Employers
        Reinsurance/Aachener Rückversicherungs -Gesellschafts AG); IV/M. 828 (Schweizer
        Rück/Mercantile & General Reinsurance Company)
11      see footnote 10
12   deleted for business secret : less than 20%
13   deleted for business secret : between 1 and 10%
                                                  4

    venture is unlikely to add significantly to MUNICH RE’s position in the worlwide
    market. Therefore, the proposed operation would not create or strengthen any
    dominant position in the Common Market.
VI. ANCILLARY RESTRICTIONS
15. The Parties submit as ancillary restrictions two provisions of the Shareholders’
    Agreement. Firstly, Article 2 of the Shareholders’ Agreement provides that it is not
    envisaged that PREVOYANCE RE will pursue its activities outside France in direct
    competition with MUNICH RE. The geographical scope of the joint venture’s
    activities will not be extended without the prior consent of MUNICH RE.
16. The Commission considers that such prohibitions on competition may be acceptable
    provided their duration and geographical field of application do not exceed what is
    reasonably necessary for the implementation of the concentration. In the present case,
    it would not be acceptable for PREVOYANCE RE to be prevented from extending its
    activities outside France, in the world-wide market for reinsurance, without limited
    duration, and until such time as one of the parents agrees otherwise. Therefore, the
    restriction contained in this article 2 is not deemed to meet with the conditions
    required to consider it as necessary to the implementation of the present joint venture,
    and thus is not considered to be an ancillary restraint.
17. Secondly, Article 3 of the Shareholders’ Agreement provides that MUNICH RE will
    make available to PREVOYANCE RE its know-how and technical assistance
    according to modalities attached to the Agreement. In return, PREVOYANCE RE
    will have to compensate MUNICH RE for the supply of services by retroceding
    [...%]14      of its reinsurance business, although the exact percentage may vary
    (retrocessions of [...%]15 with a minimum of [FF ...]16 ) according to the nature
    and volume of the business. As a result, although the amount of retrocession may
    reduce as the joint venture developes, PREVOYANCE RE will be obliged to
    purchase services from MUNICH RE and to pay for them by retroceding business
    which it might otherwise wish to place with other companies. The Parties, when
    questioned about such a provision, considered that it was necessary for
    PREVOYANCE RE to be granted access to MUNICH RE ‘s basic knowledge
    concerning the reinsurance business, especially during its start-up phase, and that the
    compensation will correspond to the support provided. In addition, they argue that, in
    business with a high risk exposure, i.e. with a high potential for negative results in a
    given period of time, it is not uncommon to retrocede in order not to endanger the
    capital base.
18. The Commission can accept that, given the nature of the market in question, a parent
    can provide services in return for which the joint venture retrocedes a part of its
    activities.. However, as acknowledged by the Parties, such relationships should last
    only for a certain start-up period. But no duration is indicated in the Shareholders’
    Agreement , nor in other arrangements between the Parties, and no option is given to
    PREVOYANCE RE to retrocede the specified amount to third companies, according
14   deleted for business secret
15  deleted for business secret
16  deleted for business secret
                                              5

    to its own retrocession policy. Consequently, the restriction contained in this article 2
    is not deemed to meet with the conditions required to consider it as necessary to the
    implementation of the present joint venture, and thus is not considered to be an
    ancillary restraint.
V. CONCLUSION
19. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
    functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article
    6(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89.
                                                                    For the Commission,
                                          6
