                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 15.09.1997
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                          MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                       ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                     To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject: Case                No           IV/M.             976-BANCO               SANTANDER/SAN
             PAOLO/FINCONSUMO
              Notification of 12.08.1997 pursuant to Article 4 of the Council Regulation
              No. 4064/89.
1. On date 12.08.1997, the Commission received a notification of a proposed
      concentration pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation (EC) No. 4064/89 by
      which the undertakings BANCO SANTANDER S.A. (BS) and ISTITUTO
      BANCARIO SAN PAOLO DI TORINO SpA (ISPAO) acquire joint control of the
      undertaking FINCONSUMO SpA.
2. After examination of the notification, the Commission has concluded that the
      notified operation falls within the scope of Council Regulation No. 4064/89 and
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

    does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and
    with the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I   THE PARTIES’ ACTIVITIES
3. BS is the ultimate parent company of the Santander Group, an international
    banking and financial group that operates through a network of offices in Spain
    and investments in Europe and South America.
4. ISPAO is a full service universal banking group. It operates mainly in Italy
    through a network of 1,242 branches.
5. FINCONSUMO, the target undertaking, was incorporated in October 1988 at the
    initiative of several Italian regional private banks. It operates essentially in the
    consumer credit business, through 17 branches located in Italy, mainly in
    Northern Italy, and in particular, in the Piemonte and Liguria regions. Their
    shareholders are : ISPAO 20% share; La Reale Mutua Assicurazioni 20%; Credito
    Agrario Bresciano (CAB) 20%; Banca di Credito del Piemonte (BCP) 20% e Insel
    20%.
II THE OPERATION : THE JOINT VENTURE
6. On August 5, 1997, ISPAO and BS, the latter through its wholly owned German
    subsidiary CC Holding Gmbh (CCH), signed a Stock Purchase Agreement with
    the shareholders of FINCONSUMO. As result of the purchase ISPAO, which
    already holds a 20% share in FINCONSUMO, will increase its holding to 40%.
    BS will acquire a 40% share in FINCONSUMO through CCH. CAB retains 10%,
    BCP 5% and Insel 5%.
7. On the same day ISPAO and BS also entered into a Shareholders Agreement on
    joint control over FINCONSUMO, which provides for equal rights in relation to
    the management of FINCONSUMO. The minority shareholders will have no veto
    rights, and therefore no controlling power over FINCONSUMO. The joint venture
    will be jointly controlled by ISPAO and BS.
8. The joint venture will continue to perform on a lasting basis all the functions of an
    autonomous economic entity in the consumer credit activity. As BS is not active
    in the retail bank in Italy, and neither BS nor ISPAO is active in the consumer
    credit services in Italy, the creation of the joint venture will not give rise to co-
    ordination of the competitive behaviours of the parties in accordance with Article
    3 (2) of the Council Regulation, and therefore constitutes a concentration within
    the meaning of its paragraph 1 (b).
III COMMUNITY DIMENSION
9. BS and ISPAO have a combined aggregate world-wide turnover, calculated
    according to Article 5 (3) (a), in excess of 5,000 million ECU. Each of them has a
    Community wide turnover in excess of 250 million ECU but they do not achieve
    more than two-thirds of their aggregate Community-wide turnover within one and
                                            2

    the same Member State. The notified operation therefore has a Community
    dimension.
IV COMPATIBILITY WITH THE COMMON MARKET
A    Relevant product market
10. The notified operation concerns only consumer credit services. The parties submit
    that consumer credit constitutes a separate market. They define consumer credit as
    a particular type of credit, granted to consumers, which is aimed at financing their
    purchases of goods. Among other specific characteristics they mention the
    following: consumer credits are granted generally by specialised financial
    undertakings to all consumers willing to purchase goods; they are provided only
    as a service ancillary to the purchase of a product; and directly by the shoppers or
    dealers at their shops.
11. Consumer credit has been considered as a segment within the broader retail
    banking sector (see Decision M.850 Fortis/MeesPierson, February 2, 1997 and
    Decision M. 907 Agos Itafinco, May 12, 1997). Nonetheless, it is not necessary to
    delineate the relevant product markets further because, in all alternative markets
    considered, effective competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA
    area or any substantial part of that area.
B   Relevant geographic market
12. The retail banking sector has been considered as a national market in earlier
    decisions of the Commission (see Decision M.850 Fortis/MeesPierson, February
    2, 1997).
13. It is not necessary for the purpose of this case to delineate the relevant geographic
    market further because, in all alternative geographic market definitions
    considered, effective competition would not be significantly impeded in the EEA
    or any substantial part of that area.
C   Assessment
14. The market share of FINCONSUMO for 1996 amounts to [...]1 of total consumer
    credits granted in Italy. BS has no activities in retail banking in Italy. ISPAO is
    not present in the consumer credit business in Italy and its market share in the
    retail bank in Italy does not in any case exceed [...]2 .
1  Business secret: Between 0% and 10%.
2  Business secret: Between 10% and 20%.
                                             3

15. In view of the market position of the notifying parties it appears that the notified
    operation will have a de minimis impact on competition in the EEA.
    Consequently, the proposed concentration does not create or strengthen a
    dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be
    significantly impeded in the EEA area or any substantial part of that area.
V   CONCLUSION
16. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and the
    functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of
    Article 6(1)(b) of Council Regulation N° 4064/89.
                                                    For the Commission,
                                          4
