                        COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
                                                                     Brussels, 02/10/1997
                                                                            PUBLIC VERSION
                                                                    MERGER PROCEDURE
                                                                    ARTICLE 6(1)(b) DECISION
                                                                     To the notifying parties
Dear Sirs,
Subject:        Case No IV/M.981 - FORTIS/C.G.E.R.
                Notification of 01-09-1997 pursuant to Article 4 of Council Regulation No
                4064/89
1.     On 1 september 1997 the Commission received the notification of an operation by
       which FORTIS AG S.A. and FORTIS Amev N.V. (“FORTIS”) will acquire sole
       control of A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R.-Bank.
2.     After examination of the notification the Commission has concluded that the notified
       operation falls within the scope of application of Council Regulation No 4064/89 and
       does not raise serious doubts as to its compatibility with the common market and with
       the functioning of the EEA Agreement.
I.     THE PARTIES AND THE OPERATION
3.     FORTIS is a Belgian-Dutch insurance and banking group. FORTIS was formed by
       the merger between Compagnie Financière et de Réasssurance du Groupe AG (now
       called Fortis AG) and N.V. AMEV (now called Fortis AMEV) in 1990 (see Case
       IV/M.018 AG/AMEV - 21.11.1990). The main activity of FORTIS is insurance and
       banking. Its operations are principally based in Belgium and the Netherlands, with
       some presence in other Member States.
4.     A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R.is a Belgian bank previously controlled by the Belgian State
       through Société Fédérale de Participations S.A. - Federale Participatiemaatschappij
       N.V. (“SFP-FPM”).
Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Bruxelles/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussel - Belgium
Telephone: exchange 299.11.11
Telex: COMEU B 21877. Telegraphic address: COMEUR Brussels.

5.   This operation has to be situated in the context of the privatisation program launched
     by the Belgian State in 1993. In that year, FORTIS acquired from ASLK Holding
     N.V./CGER Holding S.A. (which is currently named SFP-FPM) a total of 49.9% of
     the shares in the capital of A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Bank and A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Insurance.
     This operation was notified to the Commission pursuant to the Merger Regulation and
     was declared compatible with the common market in a Commission decision of
     15.11.1993 (case No. IV/M.342 Fortis/C.G.E.R.). Under that decision, FORTIS was
     found to obtain sole control over A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Insurance, while it obtained joint
     control together with SFP-FPM on A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Bank.With this operation,
     FORTIS will obtain sole control over A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Bank. In a preliminary step
     to this acquisition, A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Insurance, which is already solely controlled by
     FORTIS, will become a susidiary of A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Bank.
II.   CONCENTRATION
6.    As stated above FORTIS will have sole control over A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R.-Bank. The
      operation therefore constitutes a concentration within the meaning of article 3(1)b of
      the Council Regulation 4064/89, of 21 December 1989 (the "merger regulation").
III. COMMUNITY DIMENSION
7.    The combined world turnover of the parties exceeds 5 000 million ECU (FORTIS 18
      011 mECU, A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. 6.610 mECU). The aggregate Community wide
      turnover of each of the undertakings is more than 250 mECU (FORTIS 15 118
      mECU, A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R Bank 6.610 mECU). The undertakings do not achieve
      more than two thirds of their turnover in one and the same Member State. The
      proposed concentration has therefore a Community dimension but does not constitute
      a cooperation case under the EEA Agreement pursuant to Article 57 and Article 2 in
      Protocol 24 of that Agreement.
IV. COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT
      Relevant product markets
a)    Insurance
8.    Both FORTIS and A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Insurance are active in insurance. As indicated
      above, A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Insurance will, previously to the operation, become a
      subsidiary of A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R.-Bank. However, since A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R.-Insurance
      is already solely controlled by FORTIS, it is not considered necessary, for the
      purpose of this decision, to consider the insurance market.
                                                  2

b)   Banking
9.   The Commission has traditionally divided banking services into three main sub-
      sectors: retail banking, corporate banking and financial markets (see Case No IV/342
      FORTIS/CGER, Case No.IV/M.573 - ING/BARINGS, etc). The parties further
      suggest that the retail banking market is traditionally further subdivided in the
      universal banking market (current accounts), the deposit market, the off-balance
      sheet savings (collective investment instruments showing a capital risk), credit to
      private individuals. For the borrowing customer the products would be, among
      others, current and means of payment, ordinary saving accounts, collective
      investment funds, SICAV, short term loans and mortgage loans.Corporate banking
      would include domestic corporate, public sector, financial institutions and
      international credits.Products within these sectors would be investment loans, roll-
      overs, short-term products (i.e. straight loans and discount credits), guarantee credits,
      swaps, collective investment funds and commercial paper. Financial Markets
      comprise money markets operations, foreign exchange trading and derivatives.
10. For the purpose of this decision it is however not necessary to conclude on the
     existence of separate product markets, as even on the narrowest definition the
     operation does not create or strengthen a dominant position.
     Relevant geographic market
11. From a geographical point of view, the activities of the retail sector have been
     traditionally considered national in scope. The markets forcorporate banking and for
     financial markets activities are essentially international in scope
     Assessment
12. The only market affected by the operation is retail banking in Belgium. In this
     country, FORTIS’ banking activities are currently carried out through its controlling
     interest in A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Bank. As indicated above, FORTIS acquired this 49%
     participation from the Belgian State in 1993, which conferred to it joint control with
     the Belgian State.
(1)     With this operation the Belgian State withdraws from A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. Bank.
        Consequently Fortis position in A.S.L.K.-C.G.E.R. bank changes from joint control
        with the Belgian State to sole control. The market position of FORTIS in the
        banking sector will substantially remain unchanged [...]1.
14. In addition, there are a number of strong and well-established players in the Belgian
      market who have the ability to compete effectively with this entity; These players
      include: Générale de Banque, Crédit Communal de Belgique, Banque Bruxelles
      Lambert, and Kredietbank.
1   Deleted business secrets.
                                                  3

V   CONCLUSION
15. It follows from the above that the proposed concentration would not create or
    strengthen a dominant position as a result of which competition would be
    significantly impeded in the common market or in a substantial part of it.
16. For the above reasons, the Commission has decided not to oppose the notified
    operation and to declare it compatible with the common market and with the
    functioning of the EEA Agreement. This decision is adopted in application of Article
    6(1)(b) of Council Regulation No 4064/89.
                                                    For the Commission,
                                            4
